   [fict.gif]
   Quarterly Literary Review Singapore
   Issue illustration
   [fict.gif]

     Latest Issue:
   Vol. 23 No. 4 Oct 2024
   This Issue:
   Vol. 16 No. 3 Jul 2017
   All Issues
   Site Map

   [fict.gif]
   QLRS sections
   [fict.gif]

     Editorial
   Poetry
   Short Stories
   Essays
   Criticism
   Interviews
   Extra Media
   The Acid Tongue
   Letters


   [fict.gif]
   QLRS general
   [fict.gif]



   About Us
   News
   Forum
   Links
   Submissions
   Contributors' Notes
   Mailing List
   Advertising
   Site Map
   E-mail

   ____________ FIND


   Mirror Images
   A literary stalwart looks a little too deeply inwards

   By Andrea Yew

   An Equal Joy: Reflections on God, Death and Belonging
   Catherine Lim
   Marshall Cavendish (2017) / 212 pages / SGD24.30

   Catherine Lim's latest collection, An Equal Joy: Reflections on God,
   Death and Belonging, is a memento mori of sorts, a collection of essays
   written in response to Lim's realisation of her own mortality. Across a
   series of twenty-two essays, Lim explores questions of religion, death
   and science. In her collection, Lim sets out to answer her own
   questions that she has accumulated through life. As such, this
   collection charts a personal journey for Lim through the medium of
   narrative.

   From the outset, Lim opens up her collection with an unabashed
   admission of the solipsistic nature of this collection. As she states:

     It is thus a completely self-absorbed book, written to myself, for
     myself, about myself. Narcissism of the most unabashed kind! But
     since my readers have indulged me for so long, they may not mind one
     more display of the idiosyncrasy that has governed much of my
     writing.

   On one hand, the admission that it is a "self-absorbed book" can be
   off-putting as it rings of indulgence and suggests that the book is
   premised on Lim's existing popularity as an award-winning writer for
   its readership. As Lim herself states: "It consists of short chapters
   in no particular order of chronology or significance, with no overall
   connecting theme or tone." Indeed, the collection jumps between essays
   about science, early humans, and speculations on the private life of
   religious figures with seemingly no connection whatsoever. While it may
   chart Lim's personal treasure trove of knowledge, the jumps are
   jarring, making the collection seem like a random mishmash of thought.
   As such, at times, the collection can seem like the indulgent,
   solipsistic presentation of Lim's personal headspace. Even within each
   essay, the meandering prose makes it difficult to follow Lim's train of
   thought at times and, hence, the argument she puts forth, if any, is
   unclear. For instance, in 'Guilt', Lim begins her essay by describing
   the gods of her childhood, "the Taoist Tee Kong" and "the Christian God
   of her adult years". The essay describes the guilt she felt as a child
   for seemingly having caused misfortune to befall others through her own
   perceived blessings she has received in life. However, the essay
   mysteriously brings in Galileo at the end, the only connection of
   Galileo with her childhood guilt encapsulated in the sentence: "I
   wonder whether, in the case of Galileo, it was guilt or fear that
   finally left him a broken man." The link between Galileo and Lim is
   puzzling and thus comes across as quite a leap. Furthermore, the essay
   concludes with an even more puzzling link to Adam and Eve, as she
   remarks: "The story about our first parents Adam and Eve should have
   had a happy endingthe apple of knowledge should not have been forbidden
   in the first place, but readily available to all who sought it." The
   original portrayal of guilt is long lost at this point. Although each
   essay, like this, is characteristically bookended by Lim's conclusion,
   the essay seems to be governed by an internal logic that eludes the
   reader.

   Nevertheless, the collection is arguably Lim's final answer to the fear
   of death, which is the collection's central preoccupation. As the
   collection concludes with the final essay, 'An Equal Joy', the
   collection's namesake: "I have loved and lived life richly and deeply,
   and I embrace its closure with an equal joy." On one hand, it
   foregrounds the notion that the collection is very much a presentation
   of Lim's answers to the questions she has accumulated through life, the
   closing statement to a rich life. However, it is striking as the line
   is also intended to be Lim's own obituary. Art, represented through
   this collection, will always stand the test of time, and is Lim's
   response to the transience of life. As such, the collection is also a
   meditation on the relationship between art and mortality.

   An Equal Joy is very much a personal narrative space for Lim. As she
   states in her introductory essay: "This book is about the long and
   intense spiritual journey I have undertaken, with its many conflicts of
   head and heart, logic and feeling, joy and pain, certitude and doubt".
   True to her introduction, the collection is a working through of
   conflict as Lim answers the questions she presents herself. The
   collection is a space for catharsis, which is reflected in both its
   content and structure. Lim titles her essays with a mix of questions
   and personal conclusions. For instance, there are essays questioning
   'Did the Neanderthals Have Souls?' to doctrinal essays such as 'My
   Holy/ Holistic Trinity' or 'The Right To Die'.

   In Lim's collection, narratives are presented as a means of working
   through conflict. For instance, in 'A Bondmaid named Hoon', Lim
   responds to her own questions about her original work, The Bondmaid, in
   which a reader had asked "Why did you have to make Han die in the end?
   Why couldn't she have had a happy life after all that terrible
   suffering?" In response, Lim wrote 'A Bondmaid Named Hoon', an
   alternative parallel to The Bondmaid, in which Hoon exacts the justice
   her original protagonist did not. However, she had her own misgivings
   even after the story was finished. As Lim states: "And I certainly was
   not at all comfortable about Hoon. Why? I didn't know then, and I'm not
   sure I know now." Lim goes on to summarise the story of Hoon. However,
   what is significant is that through the retelling of the narrative, Lim
   also resolves some of her personal misgivings. As she states even
   before she summarises her story: "A summary of the abandoned story of
   the bondmaid Hoon may explain the reason for the abandonment of a novel
   that I had begun with such gusto." The choice of 'may explain' suggests
   that the author herself does not know what answers she might find, and
   hence points to a working through of conflict. And it is by the end of
   the essay that we see Lim's coming to terms with her own questions,
   finding the answer to her own question. As she states: "My discomfort
   with this character was, I think, due to a strong discomfort with
   myself for having created her" and, subsequently: "I had no choice but
   to admit to something that was worse than a mistake malice,
   small-mindedness and a pettiness unworthy of the serious business of
   writing". The shift in language from 'I think' to 'I had no choice but
   to admit' reflects Lim's working through of her own questions through
   narratives on multiple levels. At the first level, narrative is used as
   an emotional response to a question. We see this similarly reflected in
   Lim's speculations on the private life of Jesus as well, most aptly
   seen in 'Did Jesus Have A Sense of Humor?'. However, on another level,
   it is also through the medium of narrative or, rather, reflecting upon
   an alternative narrative that Lim also works through her own personal
   conflicts, moving from particular questions to more general answers
   about her views on writing. In this sense, the collection's structure
   can also be interpreted similarly. Lim's essays, whilst on one hand a
   direct emotional response to questions, also reflect a summation of her
   life philosophies, a compilation of her experiences and a synthesis of
   a lifetime of accumulated knowledge.

   However, while Lim's collection may have provided personal catharsis,
   it can isolate the reader at times, given that her answers are very
   specific to a set of questions she has defined, dictated by her
   idiosyncratic interests, such as her interest in the private lives of
   public or religious figures. For instance, the essay 'A Tale of
   Princess Diana' presents an alternate narrative predicated upon the
   idea of cloning princess Diana, and its social and legal implications.
   As Lim states:

     This story was written on a whim, has never been published and never
     will be. Hence I allowed myself to end it with any number of
     questions, some of them quite nonsensical, most of them
     unanswerable, because ultimately when the science clashes with
     social, ethical, psychological, philosophical and legal matters.

   However, given that the story is published as part of the collection,
   this sets up the reader's expectation that some conclusion is to be
   derived from it. This is not to say that all narratives must end on a
   conclusive note but, rather, there must be a point to the narrative
   that extends beyond the 'whim' of the writer, as to do otherwise seems
   rather arrogant and presumptuous. The merit of this collection should
   not depend on Lim's fame alone rather than its contribution to a body
   of literature. While the collection provides answers for Lim, as a work
   of art, it needs to go beyond the writer to resonate with the reader.
   Concluding a narrative spawned from a peculiar interest in the private
   life of Princess Diana with even more unanswered questions is
   frustrating at best for the reader. Even Lim's fascination with
   Princess Diana is puzzling. Perhaps something within Princess Diana's
   glamorous life resonated with Lim's colourful one, as she admits to
   being 'intrigued by the paradoxes in the princess's life'. Perhaps
   Lim's alternative narrative surrounding the implications of cloning is
   an exploration of the possibility and implications of immortality. This
   becomes an especially pertinent question, especially if Lim found
   parallels between her literary renown and Princess Diana's fame and,
   hence, Princess Diana's death is viewed as a timely reminder of Lim's
   own mortality. However, the reader can only speculate. The link between
   Lim, Princess Diana and cloning is tentative at best and frustrating at
   worst. Perhaps it is in the nature of the objective of this collection
   that comes across as a swansong of Lim's life experiences, consisting
   of both questions answered and unanswered. However, as a literary work,
   it leaves the reader expecting more.

   All in all, Lim's collection brings to mind Plato's wise words: "An
   unexamined life is not worth living." In the face of her own mortality,
   Lim's collection brings together a lifetime of experience and knowledge
   to present her own personal life philosophy, providing a sense of
   closure for a life well-lived. However, it is very much a collection
   written for herself.

                        Previous Page < ^ > Next Page

   QLRS Vol. 16 No. 3 Jul 2017

   _____

   About Andrea Yew
   Mail the editors
   Return to Vol. 16 No. 3 Jul 2017





   CRITICISM ELSEWHERE IN THIS ISSUE
   Going Local, Not Global
   Priscilla Gan reviews Balli Kaur Jaswal.
   For the record July 2017

   RELATED LINKS

   An Equal Joy
   External link to Marshall Cavendish.

   Overview of An Equal Joy
   External link to the Straits Times.

   Catherine Lim
   External link to Wikipedia.

   [fict.gif] [fict.gif] [fict.gif] [fict.gif] [fict.gif] [fict.gif]
   [fict.gif] [fict.gif] [fict.gif]
   [fict.gif]
                                 [fict.gif]

   Return to QLRS home
   [fict.gif]
   [fict.gif]

                     Copyright © 2001-2025 The Authors
                   Privacy Policy | Terms of Use | E-mail
