   #E-International Relations » Feed E-International Relations » Comments
   Feed JSON oEmbed (JSON) oEmbed (XML)

     * Articles
     * Books
     * Features
     * Students
     * More
          + About us
          + Donate
          + Advertise
          + Join our team
          + Republication and referencing
          + Weekly newsletter
          + Submissions
          + RSS feed

   Submissions
   ____________________

   ____________________

     * Articles
     * Books
     * Features
     * Students

     * About us
     * Submissions
     * Donate
     * Advertise
     * Join our team
     * Republication and referencing
     * Weekly newsletter

Filling the Gap: The Moral Purpose of the State and the Duty to Intervene

   Joost Hendrik Pietschmann
   Download PDF
   Jun 6 2021 •
   1,301
   views
   This content was originally written for an undergraduate or Master's
   program. It is published as part of our mission to showcase
   peer-leading papers written by students during their studies. This work
   can be used for background reading and research, but should not be
   cited as an expert source or used in place of scholarly articles/books.
   WikiImages/Pixabay
   WikiImages/Pixabay

   What responsibilities do governments have for the human rights of
   people living under the jurisdiction of other states? For instance, is
   there a reason for intervention on humanitarian grounds when a
   political regime is (i) harming its own citizens or (ii) unable to
   prevent harm imposed on its citizens by another actor? When, given the
   importance of state sovereignty in international law, can intervention
   in such cases be regarded as legal, and is there a scenario in which it
   is morally permissible to engage in illegal humanitarian intervention?
   If there is a moral and/or legal right to intervene, does this also
   constitute an obligation for states to intervene?

   The above questions have now concerned scholars since the establishment
   of the modern state in the wake of the Westphalian peace. However, they
   still have not lost any of their urgency as situations continue to
   arise frequently in which human rights violations are taking place
   within the jurisdiction of sovereign states. For most of this time, the
   debate revolved around the question of permissibility and thus if
   intervention can be considered as either a moral or a legal right or
   both. Yet, in recent years the scholarly dialogue has shifted from
   questioning and/or positing a right to intervene towards questioning
   and/or positing a duty to intervene (Bagnoli 2006: 118). One reason for
   why this shift occurred is undoubtedly the release of the report by the
   International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty
   (ICISS)[1] in 2001, The Responsibility to Protect (R2P), and the
   ratification of parts of it by all member states of the United Nations
   at the 2005 World Summit.[2]

   The report develops the idea that the notion of sovereignty as control
   (meaning that a state has total authority over its own people) should
   be replaced by understanding sovereignty as responsibility (meaning
   that the state carries a duty of safeguarding the basic human rights of
   its citizens) (ICISS 2001: 2.14, 2.15). On this account, it follows
   that the sovereignty of a state can be temporarily suspended in cases
   in which it is rendered unable or is unwilling to meet its
   responsibility of protecting the human rights of its citizens (e.g. in
   the case of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing, and crimes against
   humanity). In such cases, the ‘responsibility to protect’ these
   citizens is automatically reassigned to the international community
   which carries a ‘responsibility to react’ that may involve humanitarian
   intervention given the fact that all non-military means have been
   exhausted first (ICISS: 4.1; Pattison 2008: 262). What is astonishing
   is the fact that R2P argues both that a state’s sovereignty is
   contingent on its ability to protect the basic human rights of its
   citizens and that intervention becomes a moral obligation for outside
   actors once a state fails at upholding its ‘responsibility to protect’.
   As a result, the report moves away from regarding humanitarian
   intervention as something that is permissible under certain
   circumstances – a right – towards viewing it as a responsibility that
   falls on the international society – a duty (Pattison 2008: 263;
   Pattison 2013: 571).

   In this regard, however, the report does not explain why an
   intervention, just by virtue of being permissible, also generates a
   duty that obliges international society ‘to protect’. Instead, it
   simply assumes that this ‘international responsibility to protect’
   arises once the principle of non-intervention is overridden (Tan 2006:
   88). There is obviously a gap in this reasoning. In order to posit a
   duty to protect human rights that yields an obligation for states to
   intervene in the affairs of other states, there has to be proof of a
   positive duty[3] created by these rights that applies to all states in
   the same way. However, I believe that one can certainly produce the
   proof that is missing here. In order to evidence my assertion, I will
   present a constructivist argument for (i) why it makes sense to replace
   the notion of sovereignty as control with sovereignty as responsibility
   and (ii) for why intervention becomes a duty that falls on
   international society once we acknowledge the political reality of (i).
   Following from this, I am going to explain that states should intervene
   in the affairs of other states in order to defend human rights.

   My argument proceeds in three steps. First, by comparing realist,
   liberal and constructivist conceptions of human rights, I will show how
   the constructivist understanding is the only one of the “big three”
   metatheories that acknowledges the political reality of human rights,
   that is, defining standards of conduct applicable to political
   arrangements. Second, I will show that sovereignty can be thought of in
   a similar way to human rights which means that it also has a
   functional, political reality that must be recognised. Here, drawing on
   the work of Christian Reus-Smit, I will explain that the function it
   fulfils is guarding the ‘moral purpose of the state’ which is the
   protection of human rights. This enables me to prove that the political
   realities of human rights and sovereignty are co-dependent. Finally, as
   a third step, I will explain how this co-dependency yields a positive
   duty on the side of international society to intervene in the affairs
   of sovereign states to protect human rights. In this regard, I will
   further present evidence for why discharging such duty can also happen
   for practical instead of moral reasons whereby I am going to provide
   two examples: (i) status enhancement, and (ii) prevention of
   international insecurity.

   Sovereignty as Responsibility

   (i) How should human rights be conceived?

   Let us begin by taking a closer look at what can be termed the realist
   perspective of human rights. In this regard, it is important to note
   first that realists themselves have paid very little attention to human
   rights. For this lack of interest, there are at least two reasons.
   First of all, realists understand human rights as being part of ethics
   and thus belonging to domestic politics, the working of which they
   regard to be diametrically opposed to international politics (Casla
   2018: 143). This assumption is closely tied to the realist notion of
   the international realm being characterised by anarchy and thus an
   environment in which ethics has no place, meaning that an act being
   right or wrong only depends on the result of the act itself. As a
   consequence, the realist tradition has tended to view human rights as a
   secondary state goal that is subordinate to security (Wagner 2014:
   2).[4] A second reason is that realists are generally sceptical towards
   the concept of international law (Morgenthau 1940; Krasner 2002), and
   the idea that there is something akin to a universal morality that
   could figure as a bedrock for an international legal regime that
   incorporates the protection of human rights (Morgenthau 1948). Realists
   consider such aspects of international politics to be simply
   epiphenomenal which means that they mirror the balance of power, but do
   not restrict or shape state behaviour referring to the fact that norms
   get subsumed ‘in the material structure of the international system’
   (Mearsheimer 1995: 91). Accordingly, realists argue that states may
   establish and enforce international legal norms and institutions to
   protect human rights yet that it is not the norms themselves that shape
   the particular way in which a state acts but instead it is the
   underlying material interests and power relations that determine the
   state’s behaviour (Slaughter 2011).

   Their scepticism thus stems, first and foremost, from a worry that
   admonitions to obey such legal and institutional norms might be used
   malevolently by states to hide the pursuit of narrow selfish interests
   (Dunne and Hanson 2016: 63; Donnelly 1999). In this sense, realists
   criticise human rights policies for inevitably having a tendency to be
   selective and biased.[5] For example, states might stress the
   significance of human rights when dealing with some states but not with
   others with whom they have certain kinds of links (e.g. close trade
   relations). This shows, the objection runs, that states are
   self-interested actors that inevitably take a partial approach to
   further their own goals illustrating that they are not really ever
   worried about human rights (Caney 2005: 93-94). Consequently, realists
   regard human rights and individuals’ interests as largely peripheral to
   international relations. They perceive of morality as an appropriate
   standard for judging individual relations, but not the relations of
   states as the latter remains to be governed by the logic of power and
   interest. It follows that, from a realist perspective, individuals are
   objects, rather than subjects, of international politics. Thus, they
   certainly have no claim, beyond a moral claim, on other states or
   international society which is why the most that they can hope for is
   that their own state will act on their behalf (Donnelly 1993: 617).

   However, if human rights are secondary to the study of international
   relations as they do not determine state behaviour but only figure as a
   veil behind which states can hide their self-interest, why would these
   states adopt something like R2P which ultimately waves the
   irrevocability of the principle of non-intervention (which is at the
   heart of realism), thus forfeiting some of their sovereignty in the
   name of human rights? Moreover, if states are pursuing their interests
   in anarchic conditions, why would they be concerned with their
   legitimacy from a human rights perspectives as evidenced by jointly
   establishing human rights bodies at the international and regional
   level, and endowing these bodies with rights to enforcement?[6] In this
   regard, it appears, human rights have proven to be anything but
   marginal to international relations as their repeated violation has
   triggered debates questioning the limit of state rule over society and
   national sovereignty. Accordingly, human rights issues even pose a
   particularly potent challenge to the central logic of a system of
   independent, sovereign states under anarchy and thus to one of the key
   assumptions of realism whereby such development cannot be explained by
   a logic of self-interest (Sikkink 1998: 517).

   Then, since the realist perspective ignores the fact that human rights
   matter for the study of international relations in so far as they seem
   to be able to drive and/or shape state behaviour, it is now time to
   consider a second approach that is more sensitive towards this reality:
   liberalism. While liberal thinking differs, the central idea is that
   individuals have a set of basic rights that they enjoy by virtue of
   being human.[7] Accordingly, the liberal perspective of human rights
   adopts what has been termed moral universalism. On this view there are
   some moral values that are valid across the world. If X is morally
   universal, then X applies to all persons. Thus, the liberal perspective
   considers defending human rights as defending natural claims of human
   beings. It follows, that for adherents of the liberal perspective the
   function of human rights can be separated from the existing political
   reality of human rights. Then, to determine whether X qualifies as a
   human right, one does not need to look at the purpose X is supposed to
   serve in real-world politics. Rather, one only needs to consider if X
   is a ‘normatively salient interest attached to our status as human
   beings’ that is profound enough to place a duty of respect and
   protection on others (Valentini 2012b: 180; Raz 1986: ch. 7).As
   evidence for this conception liberals point to the fact that moral
   universalism has been increasingly embedded into the practice of
   international politics since the birth of the Enlightenment. Starting
   off from Europe, over time, the rights of citizens became enshrined in
   legal constitutions all over the world, the slave trade was abolished
   and criminalised, workers’ rights became acknowledged, and
   international humanitarian law was expanded. These advances finally
   became codified in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) in
   1948 which is regarded by liberals as the ratification or rather the
   acknowledgement of the existence of moral universalism (Dunne and
   Hanson 2016: 63).

   The liberal conception of human rights, however, suffers from a serious
   weakness: namely the fact that it is insensitive towards the function
   of human rights. As Valentini explains, “human rights are a
   political-legal construct that emerged under particular circumstances
   and which places constraints primarily on the conduct of states and
   their officials, rather than on that of individuals” (Valentini 2012a:
   576). However, on the liberal perspective this functional reality gets
   lost as it assumes human rights to be something that exists
   independently of the relationship between states and individuals. Thus,
   the liberal perspective regards the implementation of these rights as a
   moral obligation rather than an illustration of a particular consensus
   that exists among actors and institutions in international society and
   which has some function: that is, to define standards of conduct
   applicable to political arrangements. That the latter instead of the
   former is the political reality was probably illustrated best by Hannah
   Arendt’s reflections on the refugees and rejects that have been
   expelled from their political communities as a consequence of World War
   II:

     The conception of human rights based upon the assumed existence of a
     human being as such broke down at the very moment when those who
     professed to believe in it were for the first time confronted with
     people who had indeed lost all other qualities and specific
     relationships – except that they were still human. The world found
     nothing sacred in the abstract nakedness of being human.
     – Hannah Arendt (1951: 299)[8]

   Thus, it seems that human rights matter only in the context of
   political arrangements (such as states) and that individuals are
   deprived of them once they are failed by these arrangements. This,
   again, highlights the political reality of human rights (i.e. serving a
   function) as these rights predominantly matter for the conduct of the
   state towards its citizens or in the case when a state breaks down or
   is threatened by civil war. A further illustration of this reality can
   be provided by the fact that many of the rights postulated by the UDHR
   have a limited scope that only applies to the territory of the state to
   which the right holder belongs or in which she resides. The idea of a
   human right to free elementary education (§26.1 UDHR) or the right to
   equal access to public service (§21.2 UDHR), for example, only make
   sense when there exists a state-supported school system and public
   service. Beyond that, these rights are generally understood as not
   imposing duties upon foreigners. For example, the right to equal pay
   for equal work (§23.2 UDHR) does not impose any duty on foreigners to
   help maintain such equality within some country X or internationally
   (Pogge 2000: 47-48). Consequently, it is safe to say that the liberal
   perspective is also an insufficient starting point for considering if
   states should intervene in the affairs of other states in order to
   protect human rights as it ignores the reality of human rights in
   international relations. What is needed is a theory that is sensitive
   towards this reality and which does not disregard human rights as
   marginal or insignificant the way realism does. This theory, as I will
   argue, is constructivism.

   Constructivists perceive of international norms as “shared
   understandings as to the permissible limits of state action, and an
   acceptance that conduct should be justified and appraised in terms of
   that norm” (Wheeler 2002: 30).[9] In this regard, they are viewed as
   having a social ontological character meaning that they are social
   rather than natural facts. Accordingly, the application of
   international norms is regarded as a social construction co-constituted
   by the members of international society (Kuo 2014: 79). Viewing
   international politics according to this dynamic is helpful for
   understanding the development of human rights. Similar to social life,
   the international realm is constituted by a variety of contending sets
   of expectations as to how actors ought to behave (Dunne & Hanson 2016:
   64). Adopting a terminology created by John Rawls the rules of conduct
   that are reached despite this disunity can be referred to as an
   ‘overlapping consensus’. What is meant by this with regard to human
   rights is that people of different faiths or secular traditions (what
   Rawls refers to as ‘comprehensive doctrines’) can still and do converge
   on some common moral values. They thus reach an ‘overlapping consensus’
   on a set of human rights even though they disagree on as to which moral
   theory is the most plausible to ground these rights (Caney 2005: 29;
   Donnelly 2007). Such consensus then is political rather than moral or
   religious which means that it is socially constructed rather than “by
   nature” of human rights itself. Understanding human rights in this
   sense, constructivists then argue that the inter-state order can be
   transformed by the social construction of norms (as their acceptance
   establishes that conduct should be justified and appraised in terms of
   these norms) and has in fact been transformed in this way by the
   emergence of a consensus on universal human rights in the form of the
   UDHR (this will become apparent in the next section) (Dunne & Hanson
   2016: 64). Thus, constructivism acknowledges both the fact that human
   rights are an integral part of international relations and the fact
   that these rights are, first and foremost, political insofar that they
   fulfil a function, that is, to define standards of conduct applicable
   to political arrangements. Having established the political reality of
   human rights in this way, it is now time to take an in-depth look at
   sovereignty in order to examine how it relates to the former.

   (ii) The co-dependency of human rights and sovereignty

   Recall the fact that the political reality of human rights is one of a
   social construct that is fulfilling a specific function which is
   defining standards of conduct applicable to political arrangements.
   Continuing to adopt a constructivist perspective, one can think of
   sovereignty in the same way.

   Although sovereignty and especially anarchy were once taken as enduring
   facts of the international realm, a number of authors has now shown
   that they are better understood as ‘social facts’ (Searle 1995) or
   ‘social kinds’ (Bhaskar 1979; Wendt 1999), that is, social constructs
   that are produced and reproduced through the practices of states (Lake
   2003: 308). Accordingly, sovereignty has to be understood as nothing
   exogenous to the system but as a principle of historical contingences
   meaning that “the division of sovereignty by territory (internal or
   external) and by identity (similar or different) is neither natural nor
   necessary but the result of several historical developments” (Kuo 2014:
   79).[10] In this regard, then, sovereignty is to be seen as also
   fulfilling a function. This has been illustrated most powerfully by
   Reus-Smit (1997; 1999; 2001) who links sovereignty to the ‘moral
   purpose of the state’ which is to be regarded as the embodiment of the
   constitutive values defining legitimate statehood and rightful action.
   Reus-Smit explains that “the idea of sovereignty did not emerge in a
   moral vacuum but had to be justified, and that justification has always
   taken the form of an appeal to higher-order values that define the
   identity or raison d’être of the state” (Reus-Smit 2001: 527). What is
   meant by this is that sovereignty has always been tied to a conviction
   on what the state’s purpose (i.e. its function) is as well as to its
   ability of fulfilling this purpose (Reus-Smit 1997: 566-571).
   Accordingly, sovereignty is to be understood as being contingent on
   fulfilling its function – that is guarding the ‘moral purpose of the
   state’. Obviously, what is associated with this purpose and thus what
   is considered as the threshold to be reached for an actor to be granted
   legitimate statehood has changed over time.[11] However, as evidenced
   by the UDHR consensus, the moral purpose of the state has come to be
   most commonly linked to the cultivation of an environment in which
   individuals can freely pursue their interests protected by a particular
   set of state-sanctioned ‘rights’ (Reus-Smit 1997: 571). These rights,
   then, are at minimum the basic civil and political rights agreed upon
   in the UDHR and thus a subset of the account of human rights on which
   there is an overlapping consensus in international society. It follows
   that, under the consensus of the UDHR (which resembles the contemporary
   agreement on the set of rights that constitute the moral purpose of the
   state), sovereignty and human rights are co-dependent as the latter
   enables and legitimizes the former while the former enables recognition
   and protection of the latter.

   Identifying and being aware of this relationship, then, provides the
   necessary justification for why sovereignty as control should be
   replaced by sovereignty as responsibility. This is the case, because
   framing sovereignty in this way acknowledges political reality which
   means that it is sensitive towards the fact that there is a consensus
   on the moral purpose of the state (i.e. the gateway for sovereignty)
   being the guardian of human rights. The sovereignty that is granted to
   a state by international society under the current consensus, thus, can
   be regarded as being dependent on this state fulfilling its
   responsibility towards its citizens. Failure, in this regard, will
   certainly result in this state being publicly condemned and its
   sovereignty being partially or fully revoked due to it losing its
   legitimacy. Examples for this include, first and foremost, the passage
   of resolutions in the UN (i) to publicly denounce the failure of a
   state to uphold its moral purpose (e.g. UNGA Resolution A/RES/74/246
   condemning human rights abuses against Myanmar’s Rohingya Muslims),
   (ii) to impose sanctions on such state (e.g. UNSC Resolution 181
   imposing an arms embargo on South Africa in response to its Apartheid
   policies) or (iii) to authorize military intervention (e.g. UNSC
   Resolution 1973 authorizing the intervention in Libya).

   Intervention

   After having provided a rationale for why sovereignty should be framed
   as responsibility in the previous section, what remains to be done is
   to prove that the co-dependency of human rights and sovereignty indeed
   yields a positive duty for states to intervene in the affairs of other
   states in order to defend human rights.

   Human rights (such as the right to life and freedom from violence and
   injury) are what is called Hohfeldian claim rights, that is, duties
   that are owed to other individuals (Hohfeld 1917). In this sense, as
   Valentini points out, they follow a particular logical structure: “For
   an agent A to have a right to X against another agent B is for A to
   have the standing, or authority, to demand X from B” (Feinberg 1970;
   Valentini 2016: 53). It follows, that the notion of a right is to be
   understood as combining a duty (a moral ‘ought’) with a structure of
   interpersonal accountability for the duty’s fulfilment (Valentini 2016:
   53). The political reality of this structure was revealed by the
   constructivist perspective which has shown that sovereignty is granted
   by the state discharging its duty to provide protection of human rights
   which has become regarded as fulfilling its moral purpose. Here, the
   structure of interpersonal accountability for the duty’s performance is
   given by the relationship between sovereignty and human rights where
   the latter enables and legitimizes the former while the former enables
   recognition and protection of the latter. Thus, individuals have a
   standing, or authority, to demand X from B where B is the state.
   However, what remains unclear is how this would create a positive duty
   on the side of other states to intervene when B fails to discharge its
   duty.

   In order to shed some light on this recall the fact that the
   overlapping consensus on the moral purpose of the state (that is
   illustrated by the UDHR and the acceptance of the R2P doctrine’s idea
   to replace sovereignty as control with sovereignty as responsibility)
   is used as a means to determine which states can justify their
   sovereignty and thus their legitimacy to international society by
   fulfilling their function of protecting individuals’ rights. Beyond
   that, as was shown in the previous section, what this consensus
   constitutes is that these rights are regarded to be universally agreed
   upon (even though the underlying comprehensive doctrines differ) what
   in turn establishes them as what is called a norm on the constructivist
   perspective (i.e. a shared understanding as to the permissible limits
   of state action, and an acceptance that conduct should be justified and
   appraised in terms of that norm) (Wheeler 2002: 30). The norm of human
   rights protection understood as the ‘moral purpose of the state’ is
   thus to be seen as one of the ordering principles of international
   society (a shared understanding which binds together it members)
   meaning that it is universal in scope with respect to the actors of
   international society. Then, if these rights are universal in scope and
   universally accepted as an international norm, they constitute a claim
   that is held against every agent and/or agency that is part of
   international society. It follows that in so far as these human rights
   are universal, they will have primary and secondary addressees in the
   sense that they yield a special positive perfect duty[12] in the
   domestic environment of the state and a general imperfect duty[13] in
   international society. What is meant by this is that their ‘claim
   against’ is directed at a particular agent (the state) in the domestic
   environment whereas such claim does not have a particular addressee in
   international society that could be held accountable.

   To illustrate this further, consider the addressees of the right to
   freedom from torture. Based on the moral purpose of the state, each
   government has the duty to safeguard people within its borders from
   torture and to take the necessary steps to prevent, deter, and stop
   torturing (Nickel 1993: 80-81). The states sovereignty being contingent
   on its ability to discharge such duty then highlights why it cannot
   refrain from doing so and why human rights protection constitutes a
   special positive perfect duty in the domestic nexus for which the state
   can be held accountable by its citizens. However, such an explicit
   structure of interpersonal accountability for the duty’s performance
   cannot be found in international society as citizens of some state A do
   not have a claim against any particular agent i of international
   society S in so far that they have not opted into a constitutional
   structure with i.

   However, the fact that human rights protection thus constitutes a
   general and imperfect duty with respect to international society does
   not revoke its validity. Being a shared understanding which binds
   together international society, the norm still acknowledges that human
   rights are to be protected. This means that it does not deny that
   someone ought to act but expounds that there simply is no identifiable
   agent who can be called upon to act (Tan 2006: 102). What is important
   is that the issue of agency here is thus not conceptual but strategic.
   Hence, even if it is not directed at any agent in particular, the duty
   of human rights protection still demands full coverage. As Shue
   explains, “universal rights, then, entail not universal duties but full
   coverage” (Shue 1988: 690). This means that, even though human rights
   (being understood as universal under the UDHR consensus) do not compel
   everyone in the same way to act to aid their protection as they compel
   everyone not to violate them, it is still the case that they compel
   action in general. This means that all international actors do have an
   obligation to cooperate and coordinate so that the duty of human rights
   protection canbe effectively discharged. In this sense, that is
   contributing towards the protection of human rights, intervention in
   the affairs of other states is a positive duty that falls on every
   state of international society respectively. Full coverage, then, is to
   be provided by a division of labour amongst duty-bearers (Shue 1988:
   690). Here, there are a number of actions that outside actors can
   undertake to comply with this default duty. They might publicly condemn
   the human rights violations, apply diplomatic pressure, or impose
   sanctions (both military and economic).

   However, in situations in which the last resort condition for military
   intervention is met by the seriousness and urgency of the human rights
   violations that are taking place (e.g. one of the four crimes outlined
   in R2P adopted by the UN), it seems reasonable to suggest that states
   would be morally obliged to effectively discharging their duty to
   protect by contributing to such intervention (e.g. by providing needed
   equipment, infrastructure or troops) (Glanville 2014: 52).
   Nevertheless, it needs to be mentioned that active participation in a
   military intervention is only a moral obligation so long as it does not
   bear excessive cost to oneself. What is meant by this is that it cannot
   be expected that states engage in intervention if such intervention
   would severely endanger their capacity to protect the rights of their
   own citizens. However, this does not undermine the positive duty of
   intervention as such but rather obliges international society to
   distribute the costs more evenly so that the universal protection of
   human rights may still be discharged (Glanville 2014: 56-57).

   Finally, as mentioned in the introduction, there are also practical
   reasons for why states can have an interest in discharging their
   positive duty of protecting human rights beyond their own borders. This
   again is linked to the political reality acknowledged by adopting a
   constructivist perspective. As Raymond Cohen has explained, “[j]ust as
   the relationship of the individual to society is defined by a network
   of norms and values, the relationship of the state to other actors in
   the international system can be thought of as being governed by a
   network of permissions and constraints” (Cohen 1980: 129). State
   identity, thus, is shaped by the mutual constitution of agential and
   structural interaction in international society by which the shared
   understandings as to the permissible limits of state action (i.e. the
   norms) are created. In this regard, then, international society is
   characterised by compliance and not by enforcement, which means that
   infringing upon the ‘rules’ seldomly leads to direct punishment but
   that sustained deviation from the standards, on which there is
   consensus in international society, may severely damage the reputation
   of a given political actor (Malcom 2009: 36-37). Hence, factors such as
   fearing infamy or desiring acceptance can be as potent as prevalence of
   economic or military influence in terms of their ability to incentivise
   compliant behaviour. It follows that discharging the positive duty of
   human rights protection abroad might just be a matter of a state’s
   interest in enhancing its status in international society[14] or making
   sure that it is not eroded because other actors deem inaction in the
   face of human rights violations as unacceptable.

   Yet, there is a second practical reason that should be mentioned. This
   reason is related to the fact that not acting in the face of gross
   human rights violations erodes the authority of the UN as the primary
   facilitator of international legitimacy. The UN having
   institutionalized the overlapping consensus on human rights (the UDHR),
   the fact that human rights and sovereignty are co-dependent (R2P), and
   the threshold for legitimate intervention (R2P) is to be regarded as
   bearing the duty to oversee international society’s most extensive
   moral commitments. Then, if it would fail to secure that these
   commitments are upheld there is a risk that states would start to
   attempt addressing this moral deficit by looking elsewhere or acting
   unilaterally (Gallagher 2013: 89-90). The threat that arises from this
   is not that unilateral action may not be able to prevent the human
   rights violations that are taking place, but that the UN’s authority
   may become damaged to the extent at which international instability
   will emerge as a result of the fact that the understanding of what
   constitutes rightful conduct and rightful authority with regard to the
   use of force (previously defined and monitored by the UN) has become
   open to interpretation. This would naturally lead to a heightened sense
   of insecurity in international society. It follows, that a state’s move
   on discharging its positive duty of human rights protection abroad can
   also be linked to this state wanting to guarantee that international
   order continues to be upheld and thus to its own security concerns.

   Conclusion

   According to the above, we can assert that the essay has successfully
   shown (i) why it makes sense to replace the notion of sovereignty as
   control with sovereignty as responsibility and (ii) why intervention
   becomes a duty that falls on international society once we acknowledge
   the political reality of (i). This was done by adopting a
   constructivist conception of human rights which ultimately has yielded
   a picture of human rights and sovereignty being co-dependent. In doing
   so, the essay was able to close a gap in the reasoning of the
   ‘Responsibility to Protect doctrine’ and further demonstrate why states
   should intervene in the affairs of other states in order to defend
   human rights. It was further illustrated why discharging the duty to
   protect can also happen for practical instead of moral reasons whereby
   two examples for such practical reasons were presented: (i) status
   enhancement, and (ii) prevention of international insecurity.

   References

   Arendt, H. (1951). The Origins of Totalitarianism. London: André
   Deutsch, 1989.

   Bagnoli, C. (2006). Humanitarian Intervention as a Perfect Duty: A
   Kantian Argument. Nomos, 47, 117-140.

   Bhaskar, R. (1979). The Possibility of Naturalism. Atlantic Highlands:
   Humanities Press.

   Bellamy, A. J. (2010). The Responsibility to Protect: Five Years On.
   Ethics & International Affairs, 24(2), 143-169.

   Bellamy, A. J. (2011). Libya and the Responsibility to Protect: The
   Exception and the Norm. Ethics & International Affairs, 25(3), 263-269.

   Breakey, H. (2015). Positive Duties and Human Rights: Challenges,
   Opportunities and Conceptual Necessities. Political Studies, 63,
   1198-1215.

   Brown, C. (2002). On Morality, Self-Interest and Foreign Policy.
   Government and Opposition, 37(2), 173-189.

   Bull, H. (1977). The Anarchical Society: A Study of Order in World
   Politics. New York: Columbia University Press.

   Caney, S. (2005). Justice Beyond Borders: A Global Political Theory.
   Oxford: Oxford University Press

   Casla, K. (2018). Realism: Human Rights Foe? In D. Orsi, J. R. Avgustin
   & M. Nurnus (Eds.), Realism in Practice: An Appraisal (pp. 143-155),
   Bristol: E-International Relations.

   Cohen, R. (1980). Rules of the Game in International Politics.
   International Studies Quarterly, 24(1), 129-150.

   Donnelly, J. (1993). Human rights, humanitarian crisis, and
   humanitarian intervention. International Journal, 48(4), 607- 640.

   Donnelly, J. (1999). The social construction of human rights. In T.
   Dunne & N. Wheeler (Eds.), Human Rights in Global Politics (pp.71-102),
   Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

   Donnelly, J. (2007). The Relative Universality of Human Rights. Human
   Rights Quarterly, 29(2), 281-306.

   Dunne, T. & Hanson, M. (2016). Human Rights in International Relations.
   In M. Goodhart (Eds.), Human Rights: Politics and Practice, Oxford:
   Oxford University Press.

   Evans, G. & Sahnoun, M. (2001). The Responsibility to Protect. Ottawa:
   International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty.

   Feinberg, J. (1966). Duties, Rights, Claims. American Philosophical
   Quarterly, 3(2), 137-144.

   Feinberg, J. (1970). The Nature and Value of Rights. The Journal of
   Value Inquiry, 4(4),  243-260.

   Finnemore, M. & Sikkink, K. (1998). International Norm Dynamic and
   Political Change. International Organization, 52(4), 887-917.

   Fredman, S. (2008). Human Rights Transformed: Positive Rights and
   Positive Duties. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

   Glanville, L. (2014). Is Just Intervention Morally Obligatory? In C. E.
   Gentry & A. E. Eckert (Eds.), The Future of Just War: New Critical
   Essays (pp. 48-61), Athens: University of Georgia Press.

   Hohfeld, W. (1917). Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in
   Judicial Reasoning. The Yale Law Journal, 26(8), 710-770.

   Humphreys, J. (2016). Stop Kidding yourself, you have no human rights.
   Retrieve from
   https://www.irishtimes.com/opinion/joe-humphreys-stop-kidding-yourself-
   you-have-no-human-rights-1.2602455

   Jeske, D. (2019). Special Obligations. The Stanford Encyclopedia of
   Philosophy (Fall 2019 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
   <https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2019/entries/special-obligatio
   ns/>.

   Johnston, A. I. (2008). Social States: China in International
   Institutions, 1980–2000. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

   Kant, I. (1795). Perpetual Peace. New York: Columbia University Press
   (1939).

   Krasner, S. (2002). Realist Views of International Law. Proceedings of
   the Annual Meeting (American Society of International Law), 96,
   265–268.

   Kuo, H.-C. (2014). The Social Construction of the Norms of
   “Responsibility to Protect” and “Humanitarian Interventions” under the
   United Nations: A Constructivist Perspectives. Taiwan Journal of
   Political Science, 62, 79-114.

   Lake, D. A. (2003). The New Sovereignty in International Relations.
   International Studies Review, 5(3), 303-323.

   Mearsheimer, J. (1995). A Realist Reply. International Security, 20(1):
   82–93.

   Malcom, C. (2009). Being and Becoming: Humanitarian Intervention and
   the Constructed Duty of Justice. Ann Arbor: ProQuest LLC

   Morgenthau, H. (1940). Positivism, Functionalism, and International
   Law. The American Journal of International Law, 34(2), 260–284.

   Morgenthau, H. (1948). The Twilight of International
   Morality. Ethics 58(2), 79–99.

   Nickel, J. W. (1993). Human Rights Generate Duties to Protect and
   Provide. Human Rights Quarterly, 15(1), 77-86.

   Pattison, J. (2008). Whose Responsibility to Protect? The Duties of
   Humanitarian Intervention. Journal of Military Ethics, 7(4), 262-283.

   Pattison, J. (2013). Is There a Duty to Intervene? Intervention and the
   Responsibility to Protect. Philosophy Compass, 8(6), 570-579.

   Paul, T. V., Larson, D. W. & Wohlforth, W. C. (2014). Status in World
   Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press

   Philpott, D. (2001). Revolutions in Sovereignty: How Ideas Shaped
   Modern International Relations. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
   Press.

   Pogge, T. (2000). The International Significance of Human Rights. The
   Journal of Ethics, 4(2), 45-69.

   Raz, J. (1986). The Morality of Freedom. Oxford: Clarendon.

   Reus-Smit, C. (1997). The Constitutional Structure of International
   Society and the Nature of Fundamental Institutions. International
   Organization, 51(4), 555-589.

   Reus-Smit, C. (1999). The Moral Purpose of the State: Culture, Social
   Identity, and Institutional Rationality in International Relations.
   Princeton: Princeton University Press.

   Reus-Smit, C. (2001). Human Rights and the Social Construction of
   Sovereignty. Review of International Studies. 27, 519-538.

   Ruggie, J. (1993). Territoriality and beyond: problematizing modernity
   in international relations. International Organization, 47(1), 139-174.

   Schmitt, C. (1932). The Concept of the Political. Chicago and London:
   Chicago University Press (1996).

   Searle, J. (1995). The Construction of Social Reality. New York: Free
   Press.

   Shue, H. (1988). Mediating Duties. Ethics, 98(4), 687-704.

   Sikkink, K. (1998). Transnational Politics, International Relations
   Theory, and Human Rights. PS: Political Science and Politics, 31(3),
   516-523.

   Slaughter, A.-M. (2011). International Relations, Principal Theories.
   May Planck Encyclopedia of Public International Law.

   Tan, K.-C. (2006). The Duty to Protect. Nomos, 47, 84-116.

   Tannewald, N. (2007). The Nuclear Taboo: The United States and the
   Non-Use of Nuclear Weapons Since 1945. Cambridge: Cambridge University
   Press.

   The United Nations (1948). Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
   Paris: The United Nations.

   Valentini, L. (2012a). Human Rights, Freedom, and Political Authority.
   Political Theory, 40(5), 573-601.

   Valentini, L. (2012b). In What Sense are Human Rights Political? A
   Preliminary Exploration. Political Studies, 60, 180-194.

   Valentini, L. (2016). On the Justification of Basic Rights. Netherlands
   Journal of Legal Philosophy, 45(3), 52-63.

   Wagner, W. (2014). International Relations Theories and Human Rights.
   In A. Mihr & M. Gibney (Eds.), The SAGE Handbook of Human Rights,
   London: SAGE Publications Ltd.

   Wenar, L. (2020). Rights. The Stanford Encyclopedia of
   Philosophy (Spring 2020 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
   <https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2020/entries/rights/>.

   Wendt, A. (1999). Social Theory of International Relations. New York:
   Cambridge University Press.

   Wheeler, N. J. (2002). The Humanitarian Responsibilities of
   Sovereignty: Explaining the Development of a New Norm of Military
   Intervention for Humanitarian Purposes in International Society. In J.
   M. Welsh (Eds.), From Right to Responsibility: Humanitarian
   Intervention and International Society, Oxford: Oxford University
   Press.
     __________________________________________________________________

   [1] The International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty
   was a commission established by the Canadian government to answer Kofi
   Annan’s question on how the international community should respond to
   gross and systematic violations of human rights if humanitarian
   intervention is, indeed, an unacceptable assault on sovereignty
   (Bellamy 2010).

   [2] However, there were some notable differences between the ICISS
   report and the way R2P was adopted by the UN. Here the most notable
   differences are (i) that R2P adopted by the UN only applies to mass
   atrocity crimes (genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
   ethnic cleansing), rather than human rights violations in general, (ii)
   that there was no mention of the criteria of intervention, and (iii)
   that the UN Security Council was implemented as the only body with the
   authority to legitimize intervention (A/RES/60/1 2005 World Summit
   Outcome: paragraphs 138 and 139).

   [3] A positive duty is a duty that obliges its bearer to actively
   perform actions or pursue goals (such as the police’s duty to protect
   citizens). Accordingly, such duties differ from negative duties which
   only prohibit actions (such as the duty to refrain from torture)
   (Breaky 2014: 1198).

   [4] For realists, the survival of the state is closely tied to the idea
   of sovereignty meaning that any limits on sovereignty imposed on the
   state by outside actors (e.g. in the form of human rights obligations)
   are seen by realist as potentially threatening the state’s security as
   they offer an entry point that could be used by opponents to intervene
   in the state’s affairs.

   [5] The point also has been raised forcefully by Carl Schmitt: “When a
   state fights its political enemy in the name of humanity, it is not a
   war for the sake of humanity, but a war wherein a particular state
   seeks to usurp a universal concept against its military opponent. At
   the expense of its opponent, it tries to identify itself with humanity
   in the same way as one can misuse peace, justice, progress, and
   civilization in order to claim these as one’s own and to deny the same
   to the enemy. The concept of humanity is an especially useful
   ideological instrument of imperialist expansion, and in its ethical
   humanitarian form it is a specific vehicle of economic imperialism.
   Here one is reminded of a somewhat modified expression of Proudhon’s:
   whoever invokes humanity wants to cheat”. (Schmitt 1932: 54).

   [6] Examples for this include, among others, the European Convention on
   Human Rights, the American Convention on Human Rights, and the African
   Charter – the (Banjul) Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights as they all
   have yielded the establishment of judicial or quasi-judicial bodies
   which deal with violations of the human rights they specify committed
   by states.

   [7] Following from this, while realists tend to look to Hobbes and
   Machiavelli in order to justify the promotion of national
   self-interest, liberals draw heavily on the works of Locke and Kant. In
   this respect, especially Kant’s ‘Perpetual Peace’ (1795) has been a
   lodestar for the theory as it develops an idea of international
   liberalism emphasizing that all individuals have equal moral worth
   which is why an abuse of rights in one part of the world is ‘felt
   everywhere’ (Dunne and Hanson 2016: 63).

   [8] Something similar can be observed today at Europe’s borders as we
   watch refugees get rejected and deported back to Turkey under an
   EU-sponsored migration deal (Humphreys 2016).

   [9] For a detailed discussion of the role of norms in international
   politics, see also Finnemore and Sikkink (1998), Tannenwald (2007) and
   Johnston (2008).

   [10] The same point has been raised by Ruggie (1993) and Philpott
   (2001).

   [11] For example, in ancient Greece the moral purpose of the state was
   seen in “the cultivation of bios politikos”, which is a distinctive
   form of communal life; Renaissance Italians linked it to the “terms of
   the pursuit of civic glory”; in Europe during the age of absolutism it
   was tied it to “the preservation of a divinely ordained, rigidly
   hierarchical social order”; and since the Enlightenment, the moral
   purpose of the state has been understood as “the protection of
   individuals’ rights” (Reus-Smit 2001: 527-528).

   [12] Special duties are owed to a specific set of persons, whereas
   general duties are owed to all persons simply qua persons. In this
   regard, special duties are usually understood as duties we have to
   those peoples we stand in some sort of special relationship to (e.g.
   friends, family members, colleagues, fellow citizens) and those to whom
   we have made promises or commitments of some sort (Jeske 2019).

   [13] In the case of perfect duties there is “no latitude for discretion
   in when, how, where and toward whom the duty should be performed”
   (Breakey 2015: 1200). Imperfect duties, however, usually do not specify
   when, how, where and toward whom the duty should be performed.

   [14] See Paul et al. (2014) for a detailed discussion of status
   concerns as an element of international politics.

Further Reading on E-International Relations

     * “The Crime He Committed Was to Steal a Cow”: Moral Luck and Gacaca
     * Humanitarianism and Securitisation: Contradictions in State
       Responses to Migration
     * Do Assassinations Serve Little Purpose Other than to Communicate
       Resolve?
     * Virtual Invasion: ‘Just War’ and Orientalism in Call of Duty:
       Modern Warfare
     * Australia: Challenges to the Settler State’s Pursuit of
       Transitional Justice
     * The Responsibility to Protect: A Disputed Matter

   [logo--symbol-core@2x.png]
   Donate to E-IR Republication & Citations Get our Newsletter

   All content on the website (with the exception of images) is published
   under the following Creative Commons License

   Copyright © — E-International Relations. All Rights Reserved

   (BUTTON)

Please Consider Donating

   Before you download your free e-book, please consider donating to
   support open access publishing.

   E-IR is an independent non-profit publisher run by an all volunteer
   team. Your donations allow us to invest in new open access titles and
   pay our bandwidth bills to ensure we keep our existing titles free to
   view. Any amount, in any currency, is appreciated. Many thanks!
   PayPal – The safer, easier way to pay online.

   Donations are voluntary and not required to download the e-book - your
   link to download is below.
   [icon-w315-h398-pdf-file.png]
   Download PDF
