     __________________________________________________________________

           Thorstein Veblen, The Higher Learning in America, 1918.
     __________________________________________________________________

                                 CHAPTER ONE

          Introductory: The Place of the University in Modern Life

                                      I

       In any known civilization there will be found something in the way
           of esoteric knowledge. This body of knowledge will vary
      characteristically from one culture to another, differing both in
   content and in respect of the canons of truth and reality relied on by
       its adepts. But there is this common trait running through all
   civilizations, as touches this range of esoteric knowledge, that it is
     in all cases held, more or less closely, in the keeping of a select
   body of adepts or specialists -- scientists, scholars, savants, clerks,
   priests, shamans, medicinemen -- whatever designation may best fit the
                                 given case.

       In the apprehension of the given society within which any such body
      of knowledge is found it will also be found that the knowledge in
   question is rated as an article of great intrinsic value, in some way a
   matter of more substantial consequence than any or all of the material
    achievements or possessions of the community. It may take shape as a
      system of magic or of religious beliefs, of mythology, theology,
    philosophy or science. But whatever shape it falls into in the given
   case, it makes up the substantial core of the civilization in which it
     is found, and it is felt to give character and distinction to that
                                civilization.

       In the apprehension of the group in whose life and esteem it lives
       and takes effect, this esoteric knowledge is taken to embody a
      systematization of fundamental and eternal truth; although it is
    evident to any outsider that it will take its character and its scope
   and method from the habits of life of the group, from the institutions
    with which it is bound in a web of give and take. Such is manifestly
   the case in all the historic phases of civilization, as well as in all
      those contemporary cultures that are sufficiently remote from our
         everyday interests to admit of their being seen in adequate
     perspective. A passably dispassionate inquiry into the place which
     modern learning holds in modern civilization will show that such is
    also the case of this latest, and in the mind of its keepers the most
    mature, system of knowledge. It should by no means be an insuperably
     difficult matter to show that this "higher learning" of the modern
     world, the current body of science and scholarship, also holds its
    place on such a tenure of use and wont, that it has grown and shifted
     in point of content, aims and methods in response to the changes in
     habits of life that have passed over the Western peoples during the
    period of its growth and ascendancy. Nor should it be embarrassingly
      difficult to reach the persuasion that this process of change and
   supersession in the scope and method of knowledge is still effectually
     at work, in a like response to institutional changes that still are
                       incontinently going forward.^1

        To the adepts who are occupied with this esoteric knowledge, the
    scientists and scholars on whom its keeping devolves, the matter will
    of course not appear in just that light; more particularly so far as
   regards that special segment of the field of knowledge with the keeping
   and cultivation of which they may, each and several, be occupied. They
   are, each and several, engaged on the perfecting and conservation of a
   special line of inquiry, the objective end of which, in the view of its
   adepts, will necessarily be the final and irreducible truth as touches
    matters within its scope. But, seen in perspective, these adepts are
       themselves to be taken as creatures of habit, creatures of that
    particular manner of group life out of which their preconceptions in
    matters of knowledge, and the manner of their interest in the run of
    inquiry, have sprung. So that the terms of finality that will satisfy
    the adepts are also a consequence of habituation, and they are to be
    taken as conclusive only because and in so far as they are consonant
     with the discipline of habituation enforced by that manner of group
    life that has induced in these adepts their particular frame of mind.

       Perhaps at a farther remove than many other current phenomena, but
      none the less effectually for that, the higher learning takes its
       character from the manner of life enforced on the group by the
    circumstances in which it is placed. These constraining circumstances
    that so condition the scope and method of learning are primarily, and
      perhaps most cogently, the conditions imposed by the state of the
   industrial arts, the technological situation; but in the second place,
    and scarcely less exacting in detail, the received scheme of use and
     wont in its other bearings has its effect in shaping the scheme of
   knowledge, both as to its content and as touches the norms and methods
     of its organization. Distinctive and dominant among the constituent
      factors of this current scheme of use and wont is the pursuit of
       business, with the outlook and predilections which that pursuit
         implies. Therefore any inquiry into the effect which recent
   institutional changes may have upon the pursuit of the higher learning
   will necessarily be taken up in a peculiar degree with the consequences
    which an habitual pursuit of business in modern times has had for the
     ideals, aims and methods of the scholars and schools devoted to the
                              higher learning.

         The Higher Learning as currently cultivated by the scholars and
   scientists of the Western civilization differs not generically from the
     esoteric knowledge purveyed by specialists in other civilizations,
     elsewhere and in other times. It engages the same general range of
     aptitudes and capacities, meets the same range of human wants, and
   grows out of the same impulsive propensities of human nature. Its scope
    and method are different from what has seemed good in other cultural
   situations, and its tenets and canons are so far peculiar as to give it
   a specific character different from these others; but in the main this
   specific character is due to a different distribution of emphasis among
    the same general range of native gifts that have always driven men to
     the pursuit of knowledge. The stress falls in a somewhat obviously
     different way among the canons of reality by recourse to which men
    systematize and verify the knowledge gained; which is in its turn due
    to the different habituation to which civilized men are subjected, as
   contrasted with the discipline exercised by other and earlier cultures.

         In point of its genesis and growth any system of knowledge may
      confidently be run back, in the main, to the initiative and bias
      afforded by two certain impulsive traits of human nature: an Idle
                Curiosity, and the Instinct of Workmanship.^2

       In this generic trait the modern learning does not depart from the
    rule that holds for the common run. Men instinctively seek knowledge,
    and value it. The fact of this proclivity is well summed up in saying
   that men are by native gift actuated with an idle curiosity, -- "idle"
      in the sense that a knowledge of things is sought, apart from any
    ulterior use of the knowledge so gained.^3 This, of course, does not
     imply that the knowledge so gained will not be turned to practical
   account. In point of fact, although the fact is not greatly relevant to
    the inquiry here in hand, the native proclivity here spoken of as the
       instinct of workmanship will unavoidably incline men to turn to
    account, in a system of ways and means, whatever knowledge so becomes
    available. But the instinct of workmanship has also another and more
    pertinent bearing in these premises, in that it affords the norms, or
     the scheme of criteria and canons of verity, according to which the
      ascertained facts will be construed and connected up in a body of
     systematic knowledge. Yet the sense of workmanship takes effect by
      recourse to divers expedients and reaches its ends by recourse to
    varying principles, according as the habituation of workday life has
     enforced one or another scheme of interpretation for the facts with
                            which it has to deal.

       The habits of thought induced by workday life impose themselves as
   ruling principles that govern the quest of knowledge; it will therefore
    be the habits of thought enforced by the current technological scheme
       that will have most (or most immediately) to say in the current
   systematization of facts. The working logic of the current state of the
   industrial arts will necessarily insinuate itself as the logical scheme
      which must, of course, effectually govern the interpretation and
     generalizations of fact in all their commonplace relations. But the
       current state of the industrial arts is not all that conditions
   workmanship. Under any given institutional situation, -- and the modern
    scheme of use and wont, law and order, is no exception,workmanship is
       held to a more or less exacting conformity to several tests and
    standards that are not intrinsic to the state of the industrial arts,
    even if they are not alien to it; such as the requirements imposed by
    the current system of ownership and pecuniary values. These pecuniary
    conditions that impose themselves on the processes of industry and on
   the conduct of life, together with the pecuniary accountancy that goes
     with them -- the price system have much to say in the guidance and
    limitations of workmanship. And when and in so far as the habituation
   so enforced in the traffic of workday life goes into effect as a scheme
    of logic governing the quest of knowledge, such principles as have by
   habit found acceptance as being conventionally salutary and conclusive
    in the pecuniary conduct of affairs will necessarily leave their mark
       on the ideals, aims, methods and standards of science and those
         principles and scholarship. More particularly, standards of
    organization, control and achievement, that have been accepted as an
   habitual matter of course in the conduct of business will, by force of
   habit, in good part reassert themselves as indispensable and conclusive
    in the conduct of the affairs of learning. While it remains true that
     the bias of workmanship continues to guide the quest of knowledge,
   under the conditions imposed by modern institutions it will not be the
       naive conceptions of primitive workmanship that will shape the
         framework of the modern system of learning; but rather the
   preconceptions of that disciplined workmanship that has been instructed
      in the logic of the modern technology and sophisticated with much
    experience in a civilization in whose scheme of life pecuniary canons
                               are definitive.

       The modern technology is of an impersonal, matter-of-fact character
       in an unexampled degree, and the accountancy of modern business
      management is also of an extremely dispassionate and impartially
   exacting nature. It results that the modern learning is of a similarly
   matter-of-fact, mechanistic complexion, and that it similarly leans on
     statistically dispassionate tests and formulations. Whereas it may
      fairly be said that the personal equation once -- in the days of
      scholastic learning -- was the central and decisive factor in the
    systematization of knowledge, it is equally fair to say that in later
   time no effort is spared to eliminate all bias of personality from the
     technique or the results of science or scholarship. It is the "dry
    light of science" that is always in request, and great pains is taken
                   to exclude all color of sentimentality.

       Yet this highly sterilized, germ-proof system of knowledge, kept in
    a cool, dry place, commands the affection of modern civilized mankind
     no less unconditionally, with no more afterthought of an extraneous
      sanction, than once did the highly personalized mythological and
    philosophical constructions and interpretations that had the vogue in
                         the days of the schoolmen.

          Through all the mutations that have passed over this quest of
       knowledge, from its beginnings in puerile myth and magic to its
      (provisional) consummation in the "exact" sciences of the current
    fashion, any attentive scrutiny will find that the driving force has
   consistently been of the same kind, traceable to the same proclivity of
       human nature. In so far as it may fairly be accounted esoteric
    knowledge, or a "higher learning," all this enterprise is actuated by
    an idle curiosity, a disinterested proclivity to gain a knowledge of
     things and to reduce this knowledge to a comprehensible system. The
   objective end is a theoretical organization. a logical articulation of
        things known, the lines of which must not be deflected by any
    consideration of expediency or convenience, but must run true to the
   canons of reality accepted at the time. These canons of reality, or of
         verity, have varied from time to time, have in fact varied
   incontinently with the passage of time and the mutations of experience.
     As the fashions of modern time have come on, particularly the later
    phases of modern life, the experience that so has shaped and reshaped
   the canons of verity for the use of inquiring minds has fallen more and
   more into the lines of mechanical articulation and has expressed itself
   ever more unreservedly in terms of mechanical stress. Concomitantly the
      canons of reality have taken on a mechanistic complexion, to the
     neglect and progressive disuse of all tests and standards of a more
       genial sort; until in the off-hand apprehension of modern men,
       "reality" comes near being identified with mechanical fact, and
   "verification" is taken to mean a formulation in mechanical terms. But
   the final test of this reality about which the inquiries of modern men
   so turn is not the test of mechanical serviceability for human use, but
              only of mechanistically effectual matter-of-fact.

       So it has come about that modern civilization is in a very special
    degree a culture of the intellectual powers, in the narrower sense of
   the term, as contrasted with the emotional traits of human nature. Its
   achievements and chief merits are found in this field of learning, and
     its chief defects elsewhere. And it is on its achievements in this
    domain of detached and dispassionate knowledge that modern civilized
   mankind most ingenuously plumes itself and confidently rests its hopes.
   The more emotional and spiritual virtues that once held the first place
       have been overshadowed by the increasing consideration given to
   proficiency in matter-of-fact knowledge. As prime movers in the tide of
   civilized life, these sentimental movements of the human spirit belong
   in the past, -at least such is the self-complacent avowal of the modern
      spokesmen of culture. The modern technology, and the mechanistic
    conception of things that goes with that technology, are alien to the
       spirit of the "Old Order." The Church, the court, the camp, the
    drawing-room, where these elder and perhaps nobler virtues had their
    laboratory and playground, have grown weedy and gone to seed. Much of
     the apparatus of the old order, with the good old way, still stands
     over in a state of decent repair, and the sentimentally reminiscent
    endeavors of certain spiritual "hold-overs" still lend this apparatus
   of archaism something of a galvanic life. But that power of aspiration
        that once surged full and hot in the cults of faith, fashion,
   sentiment, exploit, and honor, now at its best comes to such a head as
            it may in the concerted adulation of matter-of-fact.

        This esoteric knowledge of matter-of-fact has come to be accepted
    as something worth while in its own right, a self-legitimating end of
   endeavor in itself, apart from any bearing it may have on the glory of
   God or the good of man. Men have, no doubt, always been possessed of a
    more or less urgent propensity to inquire into the nature of things,
    beyond the serviceability of any knowledge so gained, and have always
   been given to seeking curious explanations of things at large. The idle
      curiosity is a native trait of the race. But in past times such a
   disinterested pursuit of unprofitable knowledge has, by and large, not
   been freely avowed as a legitimate end of endeavour; or such has at any
    rate been the state of the case through that later segment of history
      which students commonly take account of. A quest of knowledge has
   overtly been rated as meritorious, or even blameless, only in so far as
    it has appeared to serve the ends of one or another of the practical
     interests that have from time to time occupied men's attention. But
     latterly, during the past few generations, this learning has so far
    become an avowed "end in itself" that "the increase and diffusion of
       knowledge among men" is now freely rated as the most humane and
    meritorious work to be taken care of by any enlightened community or
                 any public-spirited friend of civilization.

        The expediency of such "increase and diffusion" is no longer held
    in doubt, because it has ceased to be a question of expediency among
    the enlightened nations, being itself the consummation upon which, in
       the apprehension of civilized men, the advance of culture must
    converge. Such has come to be the long-term common sense judgment of
    enlightened public opinion. A settled presumption to some such effect
   has found lodgment as a commonplace conviction in the popular mind, in
      much the same measure and in much the same period of time as the
     current body of systematic knowledge has taken on the character of
    matter of fact. For good or ill, civilized men have come to hold that
    this matter-of-fact knowledge of things is the only end in life that
      indubitably justifies itself. So that nothing more irretrievably
     shameful could overtake modern civilization than the miscarriage of
      this modern learning, which is the most valued spiritual asset of
                             civilized mankind.

         The truth of this view is borne out by the professions even of
    those lieutenants of the powers of darkness who are straining to lay
    waste and debauch the peoples of Christendom. In high-pitched concert
   they all swear by the name of a "culture" whose sole inalienable asset
   is this same intellectual mastery of matters of fact. At the same time
   it is only by drawing on the resources of this matter-of-fact knowledge
    that the protagonists of reaction are able to carry on their campaign
                        of debauchery and desolation.

       Other interests that have once been held in higher esteem appear by
       comparison to have fallen into abeyance, -- religious devotion,
         political prestige, fighting capacity, gentility, pecuniary
   distinction, profuse consumption of goods. But it is only by comparison
    with the higher value given to this enterprise of the intellect that
     such other interests appear to have lost ground. These and the like
   have fallen into relative disesteem, as being sordid and insubstantial
   by comparison. Not that these "lower" human interests, answering to the
   "lower" ranges of human intellect, have fallen into neglect; it is only
     that they have come to be accounted "lower," as contrasted with the
   quest of knowledge; and it is only on sober second thought, and perhaps
      only for the ephemeral present, that they are so accounted by the
     common run of civilized mankind. Men still are in sufficiently hot
    pursuit of all these time-worn amenities, and each for himself is, in
         point of fact, more than likely to make the pursuit of such
      self-seeking ends the burden of his life; but on a dispassionate
    rating, and under the corrective of deliberate avowal, it will appear
    that none of these commend themselves as intrinsically worth while at
     large. At the best they are rated as expedient concessions to human
    infirmity or as measures of defense against human perversity and the
    outrages of fortune. The last resort of the apologists for these more
   sordid endeavours is the plea that only by this means can the ulterior
     ends of a civilization of intelligence be served. The argument may
    fairly be paraphrased to the effect that in order to serve God in the
        end, we must all be ready to serve the Devil in the meantime.

           It is always possible, of course, that this pre-eminence of
   intellectual enterprise in the civilization of the Western peoples is a
          transient episode; that it may eventually -- perhaps even
     precipitately, with the next impending turn in the fortunes of this
    civilization -- again be relegated to a secondary place in the scheme
     of things and become only an instrumentality in the service of some
   dominant aim or impulse, such as a vainglorious patriotism, or dynastic
   politics, or the breeding of a commercial aristocracy. More than one of
    the nations of Europe have moved so far in this matter already as to
      place the primacy of science and scholarship in doubt as against
   warlike ambitions; and the aspirations of the American community appear
    to be divided -- between patriotism in the service of the captains of
      war, and commerce in the service of the captains of finance. But
    hitherto the spokesmen of any such cultural reversion are careful to
      declare a perfunctory faith in that civilization of disinterested
   intellectual achievement which they are endeavouring to suborn to their
     several ends. That such pro forma declarations are found necessary
   argues that the faith in a civilization of intelligence is still so far
     intact as to require all reactionaries to make their peace with it.

           Meantime the easy matter-of-course presumption that such a
    civilization of intelligence justifies itself goes to argue that the
     current bias which so comes to expression will be the outcome of a
     secure and protracted experience. What underlies and has brought on
       this bent in the temper of the civilized peoples is a somewhat
    intricate question of institutional growth, and can not be gone into
   here; but the gradual shifting of this matter-of-fact outlook into the
   primacy among the ideals of modern. Christendom is sufficiently evident
         in point of fact, to any attentive student of modern times.
     Conceivably, there may come an abrupt term to its paramount vogue,
   through some precipitate sweep of circumstances; but it did not come in
    by anything like the sudden intrusion of a new invention in ideals --
    after the fashion of a religious conversion nor by the incursion of a
    hitherto alien element into the current scheme of life, but rather by
    force of a gradual and unintended, scarcely perceptible, shifting of
     emphasis between the several cultural factors that conjointly go to
                    make up the working scheme of things.

          Along with this shifting of matter-of-fact knowledge into the
   foreground among the ideals of civilized life, there has also gone on a
    similarly unpremeditated change in the attitude of those persons and
    establishments that have to do with this learning, as well as in the
   rating accorded them by the community at large. Again it is a matter of
   institutional growth, of self-wrought changes in the scheme of use and
        wont; and here as in other cases of institutional growth and
   displacement, the changes have gone forward for the most part blindly,
   by impulse, without much foreknowledge of any ulterior consequences to
   which such a sequence of change might be said to tend. It is only after
   the new growth of use and wont has taken effect in an altered range of
   principles and standards, that its direction and ulterior consequences
   can be appreciated with any degree of confidence. But this development
   that has thrown up matter-of-fact knowledge into its place of paramount
    value for modern culture has in a peculiar degree been unintended and
       unforeseen; the like applies to the case of the schools and the
    personnel involved; and in a peculiar degree the drift and bearing of
   these changes have also not been appreciated while they have been going
    forward, doubtless because it has all been a peculiarly unprecedented
      phenomenon and a wholly undesigned drift of habituation. History
   records nothing that is fairly comparable. No era in the historic past
    has set a pattern for guidance in this matter, and the experience of
    none of the peoples of history affords a clue by which to have judged
     beforehand of the probable course and outcome of this specifically
                   modern and occidental phase of culture.

        Some slight beginnings and excursions in the way of a cultivation
    of matter-of-fact learning there may have been, now and again, among
   the many shifting systems of esoteric lore that have claimed attention
   here and there, early and late; and these need by no means be accounted
   negligible. But they have on the whole come to nothing much better than
     broken excursions, as seen from the point of view of the latterday
   higher learning, and they have brought into bearing nothing appreciable
    in the way of establishments designed without afterthought to further
    the advance of disinterested knowledge. Anything like a cultural era
       that avowedly takes such a quest of knowledge as its chief and
   distinctive characteristic is not known to history. From this isolated
   state of the case it follows, unfortunately, that this modern phase is
       to be studied only in its own light; and since the sequence of
   development has hitherto reached no secure consummation or conclusion,
   there is also much room for conflicting opinions as to its presumptive
           or legitimate outcome, or even as to its present drift.

                                     II

        But notorious facts make this much plain, that civilized mankind
   looks to this quest of matter-of-fact knowledge as its most substantial
   asset and its most valued achievement, -- in so far as any consensus of
   appreciation or of aspirations is to be found among civilized mankind;
   and there is no similar consensus bearing on any other feature of that
   scheme of life that characterizes modern civilization. It is similarly
      beyond dispute that men look to the modern system of schools and
   related establishments of learning for the furtherance and conservation
    of this intellectual enterprise. And among the various items of this
       equipment the modern university is, by tradition, more closely
    identified with the quest of knowledge than any other. It stands in a
        unique and peculiarly intimate relation to this intellectual
        enterprise. At least such is the current apprehension of the
    university's work. The university is the only accepted institution of
      the modern culture on which the quest of knowledge unquestionably
    devolves; and the visible drift of circumstances as well as of public
   sentiment runs also to making this the only unquestioned duty incumbent
                             on the university.

       It is true, many other lines of work, and of endeavor. that may not
    fairly be called work, are undertaken by schools of university grade;
    and also, many other schools that call themselves "universities" will
   have substantially nothing to do with the higher learning. But each and
    several of these other lines of endeavor, into which the universities
    allow themselves to be drawn, are open to question. Their legitimacy
   remains an open question in spite of the interested arguments of their
    spokesmen, who advocate the partial submergence of the university in
    such enterprises as professional training, undergraduate instruction,
    supervision and guidance of. the secondary school system, edification
   of the unlearned by "university extension" and similar excursions into
    the field of public amusement, training of secondary school teachers,
    encouragement of amateurs by "correspondence," etc. What and how much
   of these extraneous activities the university should allow itself is a
    matter on which there is no general agreement even among those whose
    inclinations go far in that direction; but what is taken for granted
    throughout all this advocacy of outlying detail is the secure premise
     that the university is in the first place a seminary of the higher
        learning, and that no school can make good its pretensions to
    university standing except by proving its fitness in this respect.^4

        The conservation and advancement of the higher learning involves
   two lines of work, distinct but closely bound together: (a) scientific
      and scholarly inquiry, and (b) the instruction of students.^5 The
      former of these is primary and indispensable. It is this work of
   intellectual enterprise that gives its character to the university and
     marks it off from the lower schools. The work of teaching properly
   belongs in the university only because and in so far as it incites and
   facilitates the university man's work of inquiry, -- and the extent to
     which such teaching furthers the work of inquiry is scarcely to be
   appreciated without a somewhat extended experience. By and large, there
    are but few and inconsequential exceptions to the rule that teaching,
    as a concomitant of investigation, is distinctly advantageous to the
    investigator; particularly in so far as his work is of the nature of
   theoretical inquiry. The instruction necessarily involved in university
   work, therefore, is only such as can readily be combined with the work
      of inquiry, at the same time that it goes directly to further the
    higher learning in that it trains the incoming generation of scholars
   and scientists for the further pursuit of knowledge. Training for other
   purposes is necessarily of a different kind and is best done elsewhere;
    and it does not become university work by calling it so and imposing
    its burden on the men and equipment whose only concern should be the
                              higher learning.

       University teaching, having a particular and special purpose -- the
   pursuit of knowledge -- it has also a particular and special character,
    such as to differentiate it from other teaching and at the same time
   leave it relatively ineffective for other purposes. Its aim is to equip
    the student for the work of inquiry, not to give him facility in that
    conduct of affairs that turns such knowledge to "practical account."
     Hence the instruction that falls legitimately under the hand of the
   university man is necessarily subsidiary and incidental to the work of
   inquiry, and it can effectually be carried on only by such a teacher as
    is himself occupied with the scrutiny of what knowledge is already in
      hand and with pushing the inquiry to further gains. And it can be
   carried on by such a teacher only by drawing his students into his own
     work of inquiry. The student's relation to his teacher necessarily
     becomes that of an apprentice to his master, rather than that of a
                         pupil to his schoolmaster.

          A university is a body of mature scholars and scientists, the
   "faculty," -- with whatever plant and other equipment may incidentally
     serve as appliances for their work in any given case. The necessary
   material equipment may under modern conditions be very considerable, as
    may also the number of care-takers, assistants, etc.; but all that is
   not the university, but merely its equipment. And the university man's
      work is the pursuit of knowledge, together with whatever advisory
    surveillance and guidance he may consistently afford such students as
   are entering on the career of learning at a point where his outlook and
    methods of work may be of effect for them. No man whose energies are
   not habitually bent on increasing and proving up the domain of learning
    belongs legitimately on the university staff. The university man is,
   properly, a student, not a schoolmaster. Such is the unmistakable drift
   of sentiment and professed endeavour, in so far as it is guided by the
   cultural aspirations of civilized mankind rather than by the emulative
           strategy of individuals seeking their own preferment.^6

        All this, of course, implies no undervaluing of the work of those
      men who aim to prepare the youth for citizenship and a practical
     career. It is only a question of distinguishing between things that
    belong apart. The scientist and the scholar on the one hand, and the
   schoolmaster on the other hand, both belong within the later growth of
   civilization; but a differentiation of the two classes, and a division
     of their work, is indispensable if they are to do their work as it
    should be done, and as the modern community thoughtfully intends that
   it should be done. And while such a division of labour has hitherto not
     been carried through with any degree of consistency, it is at least
    under way, and there is nothing but the presumption of outworn usage
   that continues to hold the two lines of work together, to the detriment
   of both; backed, it is true, by ambitions of self-aggrandizement on the
            part of many schools and many of their directorates.

       The schoolmaster and his work may be equally, or more, valuable to
   the community at large -- presumably more rather than less -- but in so
    far as his chief interest is of the pedagogical sort his place is not
     in the university. Exposition, instruction and drill belong in and
    professional schools. The consistent aim there is, and should be, to
   instruct, to inculcate a knowledge of results, and to give the pupil a
        working facility in applying it. On the university level such
      information and training is (should be) incidental to the work of
      research. The university man is almost unavoidably a teacher, by
    precept and example, but he can not without detriment to his work as
         scientist or scholar serve as a taskmaster or a vehicle of
     indoctrination. The student who comes up to the university for the
   pursuit of knowledge is expected to know what he wants and to want it,
   without compulsion. If he falls short in these respects, if he has not
    the requisite interest and initiative, it is his own misfortune, not
      the fault of his teacher. What he has a legitimate claim to is an
     opportunity for such personal contact and guidance as will give him
     familiarity with the ways and means of the higher learning, -- any
      information imparted to him being incidental to this main work of
    habituation. He gets a chance to make himself a scholar, and what he
   will do with his opportunities in this way lies in his own discretion.

         The difference between the modern university and the lower and
    professional schools is broad and simple; not so much a difference of
       degree as of kind. There is no difficulty about apprehending or
         appreciating this difference; the dispute turns not on the
        practicability of distinguishing between the two, but on the
     desirability of letting such a distinction go into effect. It is a
     controversy between those who wish to hold fast that which once was
    good and those who look to make use of the means in hand for new ends
                          and meet new exigencies.

       The lower schools (including the professional schools) are, in the
    ideal scheme, designed to fit the incoming generation for civil life;
    they are therefore occupied with instilling such knowledge and habits
       as will make their pupils fit citizens of the world in whatever
   position in the fabric of workday life they may fall. The university on
     the other hand is specialized to fit men for a life of science and
   scholarship; and it is accordingly concerned, with such discipline only
       as will give efficiency in the pursuit of knowledge and fit its
    students for the increase and diffusion of learning. It follows that
   while the lower schools necessarily take over the surveillance of their
    pupils' everyday life, and exercise a large measure of authority and
     responsible interference in that behalf, the university assumes (or
     should assume) no responsibility for its students' fortunes in the
         moral, religious, pecuniary, domestic, or hygienic respect.

           Doubtless the larger and more serious responsibility in the
    educational system belongs not to the university but to the lower and
     professional schools. Citizenship is a larger and more substantial
    category than scholarship; and the furtherance of civilized life is a
   larger and more serious interest than the pursuit of knowledge for its
     own idle sake. But the proportions which the quest of knowledge is
       latterly assuming in scheme of civilized life require that the
    establishments the to which this interest is committed should not be
      charged with extraneous duties; particularly not with extraneous
      matters themselves of such grave consequence as this training for
     citizenship and practical affairs. These are too serious a range of
   duties to be taken care of as a side-issue, by a seminary of learning,
     the members of whose faculty, if they are fit for their own special
          work, are not men of affairs or adepts in worldly wisdom.

                                     III

        In point of historical pedigree the American universities are of
      another derivation than their European counterpart; although the
     difference in this respect is not so sharp a matter of contrast as
         might be assumed at first sight. The European (Continental)
   universities appear to have been founded, originally, to meet the needs
        of professional training, more particularly theological (and
   philosophical) training in the earlier times. The American universities
   are, historically, an outgrowth of the American college; and the latter
    was installed, in its beginnings, largely as a means of professional
   training; chiefly training for Divinity, secondarily for the calling of
   the schoolmaster. But in neither case, neither in that of the European
       university nor in that of the American College, was this early
   vocational aim of the schools allowed to decide their character in the
   long run, nor to circumscribe the lines of their later growth. In both
    cases, somewhat alike, the two groups of schools came to their mature
   development, in the nineteenth century, as establishments occupied with
      disinterested learning, given over to the pursuit of intellectual
     enterprise, rather than as seminaries for training of a vocational
    kind. They still had a vocational value, no doubt, and the vocational
         needs of their students need not have been absent from the
   considerations that guided their directorates. It would particularly be
     found that the (clerical) directorates of the American colleges had
    more than half an eye to the needs of Divinity even at so late a date
     as when, in the third quarter of the century, the complexion of the
    American college situation began seriously to change. It is from this
   period -- from the era of the Civil War and the Reconstruction -- that
      the changes set in which have reshaped the academic situation in
                                  America.

       At this era, some half a century ago, the American college was, or
    was at least pressed to be, given over to disinterested instruction,
    not specialized with a vocational, or even a denominational, bias. It
   was coming to take its place as the superior or crowning member, a sort
    of capstone, of the system of public instruction. The life history of
     any one of the state universities whose early period of growth runs
     across this era will readily show the effectual guidance of such an
     ideal of a college, as a superior and definitive member in a school
   system designed to afford an extended course of instruction looking to
   an unbiassed increase and diffusion of knowledge. Other interests, of a
   professional or vocational kind, were also entrusted to the keeping of
     these new-found schools; but with a conclusive generality the rule
     holds that in these academic creations a college establishment of a
        disinterested, non-vocational character is counted in as the
      indispensable nucleus, -- that much was at that time a matter of
                                   course.

         The further development shows two marked features: The American
       university has come into bearing; and the college has become an
   intermediate rather than a terminal link in the conventional scheme of
   education. Under the names "undergraduate" and "graduate," the college
   and the university are still commonly coupled together as subdivisions
     of a complex whole; but this holding together of the two disparate
    schools is at the best a freak of aimless survival. At the worst, and
    more commonly, it is the result of a gross ambition for magnitude on
   the part of the joint directorate. Whether the college lives by itself
    as an independent establishment on a foundation of its own, or is in
   point of legal formality a subdivision of the university establishment,
    it takes its place in the educational scheme as senior member of the
    secondary school system, and it bears no peculiarly close relation to
    the university as a seat of learning. At the closest it stands to the
      university in the relation of a fitting school; more commonly its
     relations are closer with the ordinary professional and vocational
   schools; and for the most part it stands in no relation, beyond that of
                  juxtaposition, with the one or the other.

       The attempt to hold the college and the no means together in bonds
      of ostensible Solidarity is by university an advisedly concerted
   adjustment to the needs of scholarship as they run today. By historical
   accident the older American universities have grown into bearing on the
       ground of an underlying college, and the external connection so
   inherited has not usually been severed; and by ill-advised, or perhaps
      unadvised, imitation the younger universities have blundered into
     encumbering themselves with an undergraduate department to simulate
    this presumptively honourable pedigree, to the detriment both of the
   university and of the college so bound up with it. By this arrangement
    the college -- undergraduate department -- falls into the position of
   an appendage, a side issue, to be taken care of by afterthought on the
    part of a body of men whose chief legitimate interest runs -- should
       run -- on other things than the efficient management of such an
   undergraduate training-school, -- provided always that they are a bona
    fide university faculty, and not a body of secondary-school teachers
            masquerading under the assumed name of a university.

       The motive to this inclusion of an undergraduate department in the
    newer universities appears commonly to have been a headlong eagerness
         on the part of the corporate authorities to show a complete
   establishment of the conventionally accepted pattern, and to enroll as
                         many students as possible.

       Whatever may have been true for the earlier time, when the American
    college first grew up and flourished, it is beyond question that the
     undergraduate department which takes the place of the college today
    cannot be rated as an institution of the higher learning. At the best
   it is now a school for preliminary training, preparatory to entering on
     the career of learning, or in preparation for the further training
        required for the professions; but it is also, and chiefly, an
   establishment designed to give the concluding touches to the education
    of young men who have no designs on learning, beyond the close of the
     college curriculum. It aims to afford a rounded discipline to those
   whose goal is the life of fashion or of affairs. How well, or how ill,
   the college may combine these two unrelated purposes is a question that
   does not immediately concern the present inquiry. It is touched on here
       only to point the contrast between the American college and the
                                 university.

           It follows from the character of their work that while the
    university should offer no set curriculum, the college has, properly,
    nothing else to offer. But the retention or inclusion of the college
    and its aims within the university corporation has necessarily led to
   the retention of college standards and methods of control even in what
   is or purports to be university work; so that it is by no means unusual
        to find university (graduate) work scheduled in the form of a
    curriculum, with all that boarding-school circumstance and apparatus
      that is so unavoidable an evil in all undergraduate training. In
   effect, the outcome of these short-sighted attempts to take care of the
    higher learning by the means and method of the boys' school, commonly
    is to eliminate the higher learning from the case and substitute the
                aims and results of a boys' training-school.

        Undergraduate work being task work, it is possible, without fatal
      effect, to reduce it to standard units of time and volume, and so
   control and enforce it by a system of accountancy and surveillance; the
   methods of control, accountancy and coercion that so come to be worked
     out have all that convincing appearance of tangible efficiency that
      belongs to any mechanically defined and statistically accountable
      routine, such as will always commend itself to the spirit of the
     schoolmaster; the temptation to apply such methods of standardized
     routine wherever it is at all feasible is always present, and it is
    cogently spoken for by all those to whom drill is a more intelligible
   conception than scholarship. The work of learning, which distinctively
    belongs in the university, on the other hand, is a matter of personal
      contact and co-operation between teacher and student, and is not
    measurable in statistical units or amenable to mechanical tests; the
     men engaged in this work can accordingly offer nothing of the same
      definite character in place of the rigid routine and accountancy
     advocated by the schoolmasters; and the outcome in nearly all cases
   where the control of both departments vests in one composite corporate
    body, as it usually does, is the gradual insinuation of undergraduate
    methods and standards in the graduate school; until what is nominally
     university work settles down, in effect, into nothing more than an
   extension of the undergraduate curriculum. This effect is had partly by
     reducing such of the graduate courses as are found amenable to the
   formalities of the undergraduate routine, and partly by dispensing with
     such graduate work as will not lend itself, even ostensibly, to the
                           schoolmaster's methods.

       What has been said of the college in this connection holds true in
   the main also of the professional and technical schools. In their aims,
   methods and achievements these schools are, in the nature of the case,
       foreign to the higher learning. This is, of course, not said in
    disparagement of their work; rather the contrary. As is the case with
   the college, so these schools also are often included in the university
    corporation by ties of an external and factitious kind, frequently by
      terms of the charter. But this formal inclusion of them under the
      corporate charter does not set aside the substantial discrepancy
     between their purpose, work and animus and those of the university
   proper. It can only serve to trouble the single-mindedness of both. It
   leaves both the pursuit of learning and the work of preparation for the
   professions somewhat at loose ends, confused with the bootless illusion
     that they are, in some recondite way, parallel variants of a single
                                line of work.

          In aim and animus the technical and professional schools are
    "practical," in the most thorough going manner; while the pursuit of
   knowledge that occupies the scientists and scholars is not "practical"
    in the slightest degree. The divergent lines of interest to be taken
    care of by the professional schools and the university, respectively,
    are as widely out of touch as may well be within the general field of
      human knowledge. The one is animated wholly by considerations of
      material expediency, and the range of its interest and efforts is
     strictly limited by consideration of the useful effect to which the
    proficiency that it gives is to be turned; the other knows nothing of
       expediency, and is influenced by no consideration of utility or
     disutility, in its appreciation of the knowledge to be sought. The
   animus of the one is worldly wisdom; of the other, idle curiosity. The
    two are incommensurably at variance so far as regards their purpose,
       and in great measure also as regards their methods of work, and
                               necessarily so.

        But with all this divergence of purpose and animus there is after
       all a broad and very substantial bond of community between the
       technical schools, on the one hand, and the proper work of the
    university, on the other hand, in that the two are, in great measure,
    occupied with the same general range of materials and employ somewhat
   the same logical methods in handling these materials. But the relation
   that results from this community of material is almost wholly external
   and mechanical. Nor does it set up any presumption that the two should
    expediently be included in the same corporate establishment, or even
     that they need be near neighbors or need maintain peculiarly close
   relations of personnel. The technical schools, and in a less degree the
   professional schools not properly classed as technical, depend in large
   measure on results worked out by the scientists, who properly belong in
    the universities. But the material so made use of for technical ends
       are taken over and turned to account without afterthought. The
    technologist's work is related to that of the scientists very much as
      the work of the designer is related to that of the inventor. To a
   considerable extent the scientists similarly depend on the work of the
    technical men for information, and for correction and verification of
    their own theoretical work. But there is, on this account, nothing to
        gain by associating any given technical school with any given
    university establishment; incorporation in any given university does
     not in any degree facilitate the utilization of the results of the
    sciences by the technical men; nor is it found in practice to further
       the work of the sciences. The schools in question do not in any
    peculiar degree draw on the work of the scientists attached to their
   particular university, nor do these scientists, on the other hand, have
   any special use for the work of their associated technical schools. In
      either case the source drawn on is the general literature of the
     subject, the body of materials available at large, not the work of
    particular men attached to particular schools. The generalizations of
    science are indispensable to the technical men; but what they draw on
        is the body of science at large, regardless of what any given
   university establishment may have had to do with the work out of which
     the particular items of scientific information have emerged. Nor is
    this scientific material useful to the technologists for the further
      pursuit of science; to them the scientific results are data, raw
     material to be turned to practical use, not means by which to carry
                 scientific inquiry out to further results.

           Similarly, the professions and the technical schools afford
     valuable data for the use of the professed scholars and scientists,
    information that serves as material of Investigation, or that will at
      least be useful as a means of extending correcting, verifying and
   correlating lines of inquiry on which they are engaged. But the further
    bearing of these facts upon the affairs of life, their expediency or
   futility, is of no interest or consequence. The affairs of life, except
    the affairs of learning, do not touch the interest of the university
     man as a scholar or scientist. What is of importance to him in all
   these matters with which the professions and technologists are busy is
      their bearing on those matters of fact into which his scientific
   interest leads him to inquire. The tests and experiments carried out at
     these technical schools, as well as the experience gathered by the
      members of their staff, will occasionally afford him material for
    further inquiry or means whereby to check results already arrived at;
    but for such material he does not by preference resort to any one of
   the technical schools as contrasted with any other, and it is quite an
   idle question whether the source of any such serviceable information is
     a school attached to his own university. The investigator finds his
      material where he can; which comes to saying that he draws on the
    general body of technical knowledge, with no afterthought as to what
   particular technical school may have stood in some relation or other to
                   the information which he finds useful.

       Neither to the man engaged in university work nor to the technical
    schools that may serve him as occasional sources of material is there
     any advantage to be derived from their inclusion in the university
      establishment. Indeed, it is a detriment to both parties, as has
     already been remarked, but more decidedly to the university men. By
     including the technical and professional schools in the university
    corporation the technologists and professional men attached to these
   schools are necessarily included among the academic staff, and so they
   come to take their part in the direction of academic affairs at large.
     In what they so do toward shaping the academic policy they will not
     only count for all they are worth, but they are likely to count for
    something more than their due share in this respect; for they are to
      some extent trained to the conduct of affairs, and so come in for
    something of that deference that is currently paid to men of affairs,
    at the same time that this practical training gives them an advantage
     over their purely academic colleagues, in the greater assurance and
    adroitness with which they are able to present their contentions. By
   virtue of this same training, as well as by force of current practical
   interest, the technologist and the professional man are, like other men
    of affairs, necessarily and habitually impatient of any scientific or
    scholarly work that does not obviously lend itself to some practical
   use. The technologist appreciates what is mechanically serviceable; the
      professional man, as, for instance, the lawyer, appreciates what
     promises pecuniary gain; and the two unite with the business-man at
       large in repudiating whatever does not look directly to such a
   utilitarian outcome. So that as members of the academic staff these men
    are likely to count at their full weight toward the diversion of the
   university's forces from disinterested science and scholarship to such
                         palpably utilitarian ends.

       But the active measures so taken by the academic authorities at the
    instance of the schoolmasters and "practical" men are by no means the
      only line along which their presence in the academic corporation
      affects the case. Intimate association with these "utilitarians"
    unavoidably has its corrupting effect on the scientists and scholars,
   and induces in them also something of the same bias toward "practical"
       results in their work; so that they no longer pursue the higher
    learning with undivided interest, but with more or less of an eye to
   the utilitarian main chance; whereby the advantages of specialization,
   which are the reason for these schools, are lost, and the pride of the
        modern community is wounded in its most sensitive spot -- the
                       efficiency of its specialists.

          So also, on the other hand, the formal incorporation of these
      technological and professional men in the academic body, with its
   professedly single-minded interest in learning, has its effect on their
      frame of mind. They are, without intending it, placed in a false
    position, which unavoidably leads them to court a specious appearance
   of scholarship, and so to invest their technological discipline with a
     degree of pedantry and sophistication; whereby it is hoped to give
    these schools and their work some scientific and scholarly prestige,
        and so lift it to that dignity that is pressed to attach to a
       non-utilitarian pursuit of learning. Doubtless this pursuit of
      scholarly prestige is commonly successful, to the extent that it
    produces the desired conviction of awe in the vulgar, who do not know
       the difference; but all this make-believe scholarship, however
   successfully staged, is not what these schools are designed for; or at
    least it is not what is expected of them, nor is it what they can do
                         best and most efficiently.

       To the substantial gain of both parties, though with some lesion of
      the vanity of both, the separation between the university and the
    professional and technical schools should be carried through and made
    absolute. Only on such conditions can either the one or the other do
    its own work in a workmanlike manner. Within the university precincts
      any aim or interest other than those of irresponsible science and
    scholarship -- pursuit of matter-of-fact knowledge -- are to be rated
                               as interlopers.

                                     IV

        To all this there is the ready objection of the schoolmasters and
   utilitarians that such a project is fantastic and unpractical, useless
    and undesirable; that such has not been the mission of the university
    in the past, nor its accepted place and use in the educational system
   of today and yesterday,. that the universities of Christendom have from
     their first foundation been occupied with professional training and
   useful knowledge; that they have been founded for utilitarian purposes
     and their work has been guided mainly or altogether by utilitarian
      considerations; -- all of which is conceded without argument. The
      historical argument amounts to saying that the universities were
   founded before modern civilization took on its modern character, before
   the disinterested pursuit of knowledge had come to take the first place
    among the ideals of civilized mankind, and that they were established
     to take care of those interests which were then accounted of first
       importance, and that this intellectual enterprise in pursuit of
    disinterested knowledge consequently was not at that time confided to
   the care of any special establishment or freely avowed as a legitimate
                         interest in its own right.

        It is true that, by historical accident, the university at large
    has grown out of professional training-schools, primarily schools for
   training in theology, secondarily in law and medicine. It is also true,
    in like wise and in like degree, that modern science and scholarship
     have grown out of the technology of handicraft and the theological
      philosophy of the schoolmen.^7 But just as it would be a bootless
    enterprise to cut modern science back into handicraft technology, so
   would it be a gratuitous imbecility to prune back the modern university
       to that inchoate phase of its life-history and make it again a
     corporation for the training of theologians, jurists and doctors of
      medicine. The historical argument does not enjoin a return to the
     beginning of things, but rather an intelligent appreciation of what
                            things are coming to.

       The genesis of the university at large, taken as an institution of
     civilized life, is an incident of the transition from the barbarian
    culture of the middle ages to modern times, and its later growth and
   acquirement of character is an incident of the further growth of modern
   civilization; and the character of this later growth of the university
      reflects the bent of modern civilization, as contrasted with the
        barbarian spirit of things in the mediaeval spiritual world.

         In a general way, the place of the university in the culture of
     Christendom is still substantially the same as it has been from the
    beginning. Ideally, and in the popular apprehension, it is, as it has
       always been, a corporation for the cultivation and care of the
      community's highest aspirations and ideals. But these ideals and
      aspirations have changed somewhat with the changing scheme of the
    Western civilization; and so the university has also concomitantly so
       changed in character, aims and ideals as to leave it still the
    corporate organ of the community's dominant intellectual interest. At
    the same time, it is true, these changes in the purpose and spirit of
      the university have always been, and are always being, made only
    tardily, reluctantly, concessively, against the protests of those who
    are zealous for the commonplaces of the day before yesterday. Such is
   the character of institutional growth and change; and in its adaptation
       to the altered requirements of an altered scheme of culture the
       university has in this matter been subject to the conditions of
       institutional growth at large. An institution is, after all, a
   prevalent habit of thought, and as such it is subject to the conditions
   and limitations that surround any change in the habitual frame of mind
                         prevalent in the community.

        The university of medieval and early modern times, that is to say
   the barbarian university, was necessarily given over to the pragmatic,
   utilitarian disciplines, since that is the nature of barbarism; and the
   barbarian university is but another, somewhat sublimated, expression of
    the same barbarian frame of mind. The barbarian culture is pragmatic,
      utilitarian, worldly wise, and its learning partakes of the same
    complexion. The barbarian, late or early, is typically an unmitigated
   pragmatist; that is the spiritual trait that most profoundly marks him
    off from the savage on the one hand and from the civilized man on the
   other hand. "He turns a keen, untroubled face home to the instant need
                                 of things."

        The high era of barbarism in Europe, the Dark and Middle Ages, is
     marked off from what went before and from what has followed in the
        cultural sequence, by a hard and fast utilitarian animus. The
   all-dominating spiritual trait of those times is that men then made the
   means of life its end. It is perhaps needless to call to mind that much
   of this animus still survives in later civilized life, especially in so
     far as the scheme of civilized life is embodied in the competitive
   system. In that earlier time, practical sagacity and the serviceability
       of any knowledge acquired, its bearing on individual advantage,
   spiritual or temporal, was the ruling consideration, as never before or
    since. The best of men in that world were not ashamed to avow that a
   boundless solicitude for their own salvation was their worthiest motive
    of conduct, and it is plain in all their speculations that they were
   unable to accept any other motive or sanction as final in any bearing.
    Saint and sinner alike knew no higher rule than expediency, for this
    world and the next. And, for that matter, so it still stands with the
     saint and the sinner, -- who make up much of the commonplace human
      material in the modern community; although both the saint and the
   sinner in the modern community carry, largely by shamefaced subreption,
    an ever increasing side-line of other and more genial interests that
     have no merit in point of expediency whether for this world or the
                                    next.

       Under the rule of such a cultural ideal the corporation of learning
     could not well take any avowed stand except as an establishment for
   utilitarian instruction, the practical expediency of whose work was the
   sole overt test of its competency. And such it still should continue to
      be according to the avowed aspirations of the staler commonplace
   elements in the community today. By subreption, and by a sophisticated
      subsumption under some ostensibly practical line of interest and
   inquiry, it is true, the university men of the earlier time spent much
    of their best endeavour on matters of disinterested scholarship that
       had no bearing on any human want more to the point than an idle
    curiosity; and by a similar turn of subreption and sophistication the
   later spokesmen of the barbarian ideal take much complacent credit for
    the "triumphs of modern science" that have nothing but an ostensible
     bearing on any matter of practical expediency, and they look to the
     universities to continue this work of the idle curiosity under some
                     plausible pretext of practicality.

       So the university of that era unavoidably came to be organized as a
      more or less comprehensive federation of professional schools or
   faculties devoted to such branches of practical knowledge as the ruling
    utilitarian interests of the time demanded. Under this overshadowing
   barbarian tradition the universities of early modern times started out
    as an avowed contrivance for indoctrination in the ways and means of
     salvation, spiritual and temporal, individual and collective, -- in
    some sort a school of engineering, primarily in divinity, secondarily
    in law and politics, and presently in medicine and also in the other
    professions that serve a recognized utilitarian interest. After that
     fashion of a university that answered to this manner of ideals and
    aspirations had once been installed and gained a secure footing, its
     pattern acquired a degree of authenticity and prescription, so that
    later seminaries of learning came unquestioningly to be organized on
    the same lines; and further changes of academic policy and practice,
     such as are demanded by the later growth of cultural interests and
   ideals, have been made only reluctantly and with a suspicious reserve,
      gradually and by a circuitous sophistication; so that much of the
     non-utilitarian scientific and scholarly work indispensable to the
   university's survival under modern conditions is still scheduled under
           the faculties of law or medicine, or even of divinity.

        But the human propensity for inquiry into things, irrespective of
    use or expediency, insinuated itself among the expositors of worldly
   wisdom from the outset; and from the first this quest of idle learning
   has sought shelter in the university as the only establishment in which
   it could find a domicile, even on sufferance, and so could achieve that
       footing of consecutive intellectual enterprise running through
         successive generations of scholars which is above all else
      indispensable to the advancement of knowledge. Under the rgime of
   unmitigated pragmatic aims that ruled the earlier days of the European
   universities, this pursuit of knowledge for its own sake was carried on
     as a work of scholarly supererogation by men whose ostensibly sole
     occupation was the promulgation of some accredited line of salutary
    information. Frequently it had to be carried on under some colourable
     masquerade of practicality. And yet so persistent has the spirit of
      idle curiosity proved to be, and so consonant with the long-term
    demands even of the laity, that the dissimulation and smuggling-in of
     disinterested learning has gone on ever more openly and at an ever
      increasing rate of gain; until in the end, the attention given to
    scholarship and the non-utilitarian sciences in these establishments
     has come far to exceed that given to the practical disciplines for
     which the several faculties were originally installed. As time has
      passed and as successive cultural mutations have passed over the
    community, shifting the centre of interest and bringing new ideals of
      scholarship, and bringing the whole cultural fabric nearer to its
   modern complexion, those purposes of crass expediency that were of such
    great moment and were so much a matter of course in earlier academic
   policy, have insensibly fallen to the rank of incidentals. And what had
    once been incidental, or even an object of surreptitious tolerance in
      the university, remains today as the only unequivocal duty of the
   corporation of learning, and stands out as the one characteristic trait
       without which no establishment can claim rank as a university.

        Philosophy -- the avowed body of theoretical science in the late
      medieval time -- had grown out of the schoolmen's speculations in
     theology, being in point of derivation a body of refinements on the
   divine scheme of salvation; and with a view to quiet title, and to make
        manifest their devotion to the greater good of eschatological
    expediency, those ingenious speculators were content to proclaim that
   their philosophy is the handmaid of theology -- Philosophia theologiae
   ancillans. But their philosophy has fallen into the alembic of the idle
    curiosity and has given rise to a body of modern science, godless and
     unpractical, that has no intended or even ostensible bearing on the
     religious fortunes of mankind; and their sanctimonious maxim would
   today be better accepted as the subject of a limerick than of a homily.
    Except in degree, the fortunes of the temporal pragmatic disciplines,
     in Law and Medicine, have been much the same as that of their elder
     sister, Theology. Professionalism and practical serviceability have
    been gradually crowded into the background of academic interests and
     overlaid with quasi-utilitarian research -- such as the history of
   jurisprudence, comparative physiology, and the like. They have in fact
                         largely been eliminated.^8

         And changes running to this effect have gone farthest and have
    taken most consistent effect in those communities that are most fully
    imbued with the spirit of the modern peaceable civilization. It is in
   the more backward communities and schools that the barbarian animus of
    utilitarianism still maintains itself most nearly intact, whether it
    touches matters of temporal or of spiritual interest. With the later
       advance of culture, as the intellectual interest has gradually
    displaced the older ideals in men's esteem, and barring a reactionary
    episode here and there, the university has progressively come to take
      its place as a seat of the higher learning, a corporation for the
       pursuit of knowledge; and barring accidental reversions, it has
   increasingly asserted itself as an imperative necessity, more and more
    consistently, that the spirit of disinterested inquiry must have free
    play in these seminaries of the higher learning, without afterthought
   as to the practical or utilitarian consequences which this free inquiry
    may conceivably have for the professional training or for the social,
   civil or religious temper of the students or the rest of the community.
    Nothing is felt to be so irremediably vicious in academic policy as a
    coercive bias, religious, political, conventional or professional, in
   so far as it touches that quest of knowledge that constitutes the main
                         interest of the university.

          Professional training and technological work at large have of
    course not lost ground, either in the volume and the rigour of their
    requirements or in the application bestowed in their pursuit; but as
   within the circle of academic interests, these utilitarian disciplines
   have lost their preferential place and have been pushed to one side; so
    that the professional and technical schools are now in fact rated as
       adjuncts rather than as integral constituents of the university
      corporation. Such is the unmistakable sense of this matter among
   academic men. At the same time these vocational schools have, one with
   another, progressively taken on more of a distinctive, independent and
   close-knit structure; an individual corporate existence, autonomous and
      academically self-sufficient, even in those cases where they most
       tenaciously hold to their formal connection with the university
       corporation. They have reached a mature phase of organization,
    developed a type of personnel and control peculiar to themselves and
       their special needs, and have in effect come out from under the
   tutelage of the comprehensive academic organization of which they once
   in their early days were the substantial core. These schools have more
    in common among themselves as a class than their class have with the
   academic aims and methods that characterize the university proper. They
    are in fact ready and competent to go on their own recognizances, --
   indeed they commonly resent any effective interference or surveillance
      from the side of the academic corporation of which they nominally
   continue to be members, and insist on going their own way and arranging
       their own affairs as they know best. Their connection with the
   university is superficial and formal at the best, so far as regards any
      substantial control of their affairs and policy by the university
    authorities at large; it is only in their interference with academic
      policy, and in injecting their own peculiar bias into university
     affairs, that they count substantially as corporate members of the
   academic body. And in these respects, what is said of the professional
   and technical schools holds true also of the undergraduate departments.

         It is quite feasible to have a university without professional
   schools and without an undergraduate department; but it is not possible
      to have one without due provision for that non-utilitarian higher
       learning about which as a nucleus these utilitarian disciplines
       cluster. And this in spite of the solicitous endeavours of the
   professional schools to make good their footing as the substantial core
                             of the corporation.

                                      V

        As intimated above, there are two main reasons for the continued
    and tenacious connection between these schools and the universities:
     (a) ancient tradition, fortified by the solicitous ambition of the
    university directorate to make a brave show of magnitude, and (b) the
         anxiety of these schools to secure some degree of scholarly
       authentication through such a formal connection with a seat of
   learning. These two motives have now and again pushed matters fairly to
   an extreme in the reactionary direction. So, for instance, the chances
   of intrigue and extra-academic clamour have latterly thrown up certain
       men of untempered "practicality" as directive heads of certain
        universities, and some of these have gone so far as to avow a
      reactionary intention to make the modern university a cluster of
       professional schools or faculties, after the ancient barbarian
       fashion.^9 But such a policy of return to the lost crudities is
      unworkable in the long run under modern conditions. It may serve
    excellently as a transient expedient in a campaign of popularity, and
    such appears to have been its chief purpose where a move of this kind
    has been advocated, but it runs on superficial grounds and can afford
     neither hope nor fear of a permanent diversion in the direction so
                                 spoken for.

        In the modern community, under the strain of the price system and
   the necessities of competitive earning and spending, many men and women
      are driven by an habitual bias in favour of a higher "practical"
       efficiency in all matters of education; that is to say, a more
   single-minded devotion to the needs of earning and spending. There is,
   indeed, much of this spirit abroad in the community, and any candidate
        for popular favour and prestige may find his own advantage in
    conciliating popular sentiment of this kind. But there is at the same
      time equally prevalent through the community a long-term bias of
    another kind, such as will not enduringly tolerate the sordid effects
   of pursuing an educational policy that looks mainly to the main chance,
    and unreservedly makes the means of life its chief end. By virtue of
    this long-term idealistic drift, any seminary of learning that plays
   fast and loose in this way with the cultural interests entrusted to its
   keeping loses caste and falls out of the running. The universities that
        are subjected in this fashion to an experimental reversion to
       vocationalism, it appears, will unavoidably return presently to
       something of the non-professional type, on pain of falling into
      hopeless discredit. There have been some striking instances, but
    current not ions of delicacy will scarcely admit a citation of nam es
   and dates. And while the long-term drift of the modern idealistic bias
      may not permit the universities permanently to be diverted to the
    service of Mammon in this fashion, yet the unremitting endeavours of
   "educators" seeking prestige for worldly wisdom results at the best in
     a fluctuating state of compromise, in which the ill effects of such
      bids for popularity are continually being outworn by the drift of
                               academic usage.

        The point is illustrated by the American state universities as a
    class, although the illustration is by no means uniformly convincing.
     The greater number of these state schools are not, or are not yet,
    universities except in name. These establishments have been founded,
    commonly, with a professed utilitarian purpose, and have started out
   with professional training as their chief avowed aim. The purpose made
   most of in their establishment has commonly been to train young men for
   proficiency in some gainful occupation; along with this have gone many
   half-articulate professions of solicitude for cultural interests to be
        taken care of by the same means. They have been installed by
       politicians looking for popular acclaim, rather than by men of
        scholarly or scientific insight, and their management has not
     infrequently been entrusted to political masters of intrigue, with
    scant academic qualifications; their foundations has been the work of
   practical politicians with a view to conciliate the good will of a lay
   constituency clamouring for things tangibly "useful" -- that is to say,
   pecuniarily gainful. So these experts in short-term political prestige
    have made provision for schools of a "practical" character; but they
   have named these establishments "universities" because the name carries
   an air of scholarly repute, of a higher, more substantial kind than any
       naked avowal of material practicality would give. Yet, in those
     instances where the passage of time has allowed the readjustment to
   take place, these quasi-"universities," installed by men of affairs, of
    a crass "practicality," and in response to the utilitarian demands of
   an unlearned political constituency, have in the long run taken on more
      and more of an academic, non-utilitarian character, and have been
   gradually falling into line as universities claiming a place among the
      seminaries of the higher learning. The long-term drift of modern
    cultural ideals leaves these schools no final resting place short of
      the university type, however far short of such a consummation the
                 greater number of them may still be found.

       What has just been said of the place which the university occupies
   in modern civilization, and more particularly of the manner in which it
      is to fill its place, may seem something of a fancy sketch. It is
   assuredly not a faithful description of any concrete case, by all means
    not of any given American university; nor does it faithfully describe
     the line of policy currently pursued by the directorate of any such
   establishment. Yet it is true to the facts, taken in a generalized way,
     and it describes the type to which the American schools unavoidably
    gravitate by force of the community's long-term idealistic impulsion,
     in so far as their drift is not continually corrected and offset by
    vigilant authorities who, from motives of their own, seek to turn the
       universities to account in one way and another. It describes an
      institutional ideal; not necessarily an ideal nursed by any given
    individual, but the ideal logically involved in the scheme of modern
   civilization, and logically coming out of the historical development of
       Western civilization hitherto, and visible to any one who will
    dispassionately stand aside and look to the drift of latterday events
      in so far as they bear on this matter of the higher learning, its
                        advancement and conservation.

       Many if not most of those men who are occupied with the guidance of
    university affairs would disown such a projected ideal, as being too
     narrow and too unpractical to fit into the modern scheme of things,
     which is above all else a culture of affairs; that it does not set
    forth what should be aimed at by any who have the good of mankind at
   heart, or who in any sensible degree appreciate the worth of real work
   as contrasted with the leisurely intellectual finesse of the confirmed
       scientist and man of letters. These and the like objections and
     strictures may be well taken, perhaps. The question of what, in any
      ulterior sense, ought to be sought after in the determination of
   academic policy and the conduct of academic affairs will, however, not
       coincide with the other question, as to what actually is being
     accomplished in these premises, on the one hand, nor as to what the
   long-term cultural aspirations of civilized men are setting toward, on
                               the other hand.

         Now, it is not intended here to argue the merits of the current
   cultural ideals as contrasted with what, in some ulterior sense, ought
    to be aimed at if the drift of current aspirations and impulse should
      conceivably permit a different ideal to be put into effect. It is
   intended only to set forth what place, in point of fact and for better
    or worse, the higher learning and the university hold in the current
        scheme of Western civilization, as determined by that body of
    instinctive aspirations and proclivities that holds this civilization
     to its course as it runs today; and further to show how and how far
    certain institutional factors comprised in this modern scheme of life
       go to help or hinder the realization of this ideal which men's
    aspirations and proclivities so make worth while to them. The sketch
      here offered in characterization of the university and its work,
    therefore, endeavours to take account of the community's consensus of
   impulses and desires touching the animus and aims that should move the
    seminaries of the higher learning, at the same time that it excludes
    those subsidiary or alien interests in whose favour no such consensus
                            is found to prevail.

       There are many of these workday interests, extraneous to the higher
    learning, each and several of which may be abundantly good and urgent
    in its own right; but, while they need not be at cross purposes with
   the higher learning, they are extraneous to that disinterested pursuit
    of knowledge in which the characteristic intellectual bent of modern
       civilization culminates. These others are patent, insistent and
   palpable, and there need be no apprehension of their going by default.
      The intellectual predilection -- the idle curiosity -- abides and
       asserts itself when other pursuits of a more temporal but more
    immediately urgent kind leave men free to take stock of the ulterior
   ends and values of life; whereas the transient interests, preoccupation
    with the ways and means of life, are urgent and immediate, and employ
    men's thought and energy through the greater share of their life. The
   question of material ways and means, and the detail requirements of the
   day's work, are for ever at hand and for ever contest the claims of any
      avowed ulterior end; and by force of unremitting habituation the
    current competitive system of acquisition and expenditure induces in
     all classes such a bias as leads them to overrate ways and means as
    contrasted with the ends which these ways and means are in some sense
                             designed to serve.

       So, one class and another, biassed by the habitual preoccupation of
   the class, will aim to divert the academic equipment to some particular
       use which habit has led them to rate high; or to include in the
     academic discipline various lines of inquiry and training which are
    extraneous to the higher learning but which the class in question may
   specially have at heart; but taking them one with another, there is no
   general or abiding consensus among the various classes of the community
   in favour of diverting the academic establishment to any other specific
    uses, or of including in the peculiar work of the university anything
              beyond the pursuit of knowledge for its own sake.

        Now, it may be remarked by the way, that civilized mankind should
       have come so to set their heart on this chase after a fugitive
    knowledge of inconsequential facts may be little to the credit of the
    race or of that scheme of culture that so centres about this cult of
    the idle curiosity. And it is perhaps to their credit, as well as to
       the credit of the community whose creatures they are, that the
   spokesmen of some tangible ideal, some materially expedient aspiration,
       embodying more of worldly wisdom, are for ever urging upon the
   institutions of the higher leaning one or another course of action of a
   more palpably expedient kind. But, for better or worse, the passage of
      time brings out the fact that these sober and sensible courses of
   policy so advocated are after all essentially extraneous, if not alien,
     to those purposes for which a university can be maintained, on the
      ground afforded by the habits of thought prevalent in the modern
                            civilized community.

        One and another of these "practical" and expedient interests have
     transiently come to the front in academic policy, and have in their
      time given a particular bent to the pursuit of knowledge that has
    occupied the universities. Of these extraneous interests the two most
    notable have, as already indicated above, been the ecclesiastical and
    the political. But in the long run these various interests and ideals
      of expediency have, all and several, shown themselves to be only
      factional elements in the scheme of culture, and have lost their
   preferential voice in the shaping of academic life. The place in men's
       esteem once filled by church and state is now held by pecuniary
     traffic, business enterprise. So that the graver issues of academic
     policy which now tax the discretion of the directive powers, reduce
   themselves in the main to a question between the claims of science and
      scholarship on the one hand and those of business principles and
   pecuniary gain on the other hand. In one shape or another this problem
    of adjustment, reconciliation or compromise between the needs of the
     higher learning and the demands of business enterprise is for ever
      present in the deliberations of the university directorate. This
   question gathers in its net all those perplexing details of expediency
             that now claim the attention of the ruling bodies.

                                     VI

          Since the paragraphs that make up the foregoing chapter were
   written the American academic community has been thrown into a new and
   peculiar position by the fortunes of war. The progress and the further
    promise of the war hold in prospect new and untried responsibilities,
     as well as an unexampled opportunity. So that the outlook now (June
     1918) would seem to be that the Americans are to be brought into a
    central place in the republic of learning; to take a position, not so
    much of dominance as of trust and guardianship; not so much by virtue
      of their own superior merit as by force of the insolvency of the
                        European academic community.

         Again, it is not that the war is expected to leave the lines of
   European scholars and scientists extinct; although there is no denying
       the serious inroads made by the war, both in the way of a high
        mortality among European men of learning, and in the way of a
   decimation of the new men on whom the hopes of the higher learning for
     the incoming generation should have rested. There is also a serious
      diversion of the young forces from learning to transiently urgent
     matters of a more material, and more ephemeral nature. But possibly
      more sinister than all these losses that are in a way amenable to
   statistical record and estimate, is the current and prospective loss of
     morale. Naturally, it would be difficult and hazardous to offer an
    appraisal of this prospective loss of morale, with which it is to be
   expected that the disintegrated European community of learned men will
    come through the troubled times. But that there is much to be looked
    for on this score, that there is much to be written off in the way of
    lowered aggregate efficiency and loss of the spirit of team-work, --
     that much there is no denying, and it is useless to blink the fact.

          There has already a good deal of disillusionment taken effect
     throughout the nations of Christendom in respect of the temper and
    trustworthiness of German scholarship these past three or four years,
   and it is fairly beyond computation what further shift of sentiment in
    this respect is to be looked for in the course of a further Possible
    period of years given over to the same line of experience. Doubtless,
    the German scholars, and therefore the German seats of learning whose
    creatures and whose custodians these German scholars are, have earned
     much of the distrust and dispraise that is falling to their share.
    There is no overlooking the fact that they have proved the frailty of
    their hold on those elementary principles of sobriety and single mind
    that underlie all sound work in the field of learning. To any one who
     has the interest of the higher learning at heart, the spectacle of
   maudlin chauvinism and inflated scurrility unremittingly placed on view
    by the putative leaders of German science and scholarship can not but
                        be exceedingly disheartening.

       It may be argued, and it may be true, of course, that much of this
     failure of intelligence and spiritual force among Germany's men of
   learning is of the nature of a transient eclipse of their powers; that
   with the return of settled conditions there is due to come a return of
   poise and insight. But when all due argument has been heard, it remains
    true that the distrust set afoot in the mind of their neighbours, by
   this highly remarkable exhibition of their personal equation, will long
    inure to the disability of Germany's men of learning as a force to be
    counted on in that teamwork that is of the essence of things for the
    advancement of learning. In effect, Germany, and Germany's associates
    in this warlike enterprise, will presumably be found bankrupt in this
       respect on the return of peace, even beyond the other nations.

       These others have also not escaped the touch of the angel of decay,
    but the visible corruption of spiritual and intellectual values does
    not go the same length among them. Nor have these others suffered so
     heavy a toll on their prospective scholarly man power. It is all a
   matter of degree and of differential decline, coupled with a failure of
   corporate organization and of the usages and channels of communion and
     co-operation. Chauvinistic self-sufficiency and disesteem of their
     neighbours have apparently also not gone so deep and far among the
     other nations; although here again it is only a relative degree of
                          immunity that they enjoy.

       And all this holds true of the Americans in much the same way as of
    the rest; except that the Americans have, at least hitherto, not been
    exposed to the blight in anything like the same degree as any one of
    those other peoples with whom they come in comparison here. It is, of
   course, not easy to surmise what may yet overtake them, and the others
     with them; but judged on the course of things hitherto, and on the
       apparent promise of the calculable future, it is scarcely to be
    presumed that the Americans are due to suffer so extreme a degree of
        dilapidation as the European peoples, -- even apart from the
     accentuated evil case of the Germans. The strain has hitherto been
      lighter here, and it promises so to continue, whether the further
       duration of the war shall turn out to be longer or shorter. The
    Americans are, after all, somewhat sheltered from the impact; and so
     soon as the hysterical anxiety induced by the shock has had time to
   spend itself, it should reasonably be expected that this people will be
   able soberly to take stock of its assets and to find that its holdings
      in the domain of science and scholarship are, in the main, still
                                   intact.

       Not that no loss has been incurred, nor that no material degree of
      derangement is to be looked for, but in comparison with what the
     experience of the war is bringing to the Europeans, the case of the
    Americans should still be the best there is to be looked for and the
    best is always good enough, perforce. So it becomes a question, what
   the Americans will do with the best opportunity which the circumstances
   offer. And on their conduct of their affairs in this bearing turns not
      only their own fortune in respect of the interests of science and
      scholarship, but in great measure the fortunes of their overseas
        friends and co-partners in the republic of learning as well.

        The fortunes of war promise to leave the American men of learning
    in a strategic position, in the position of a strategic reserve, of a
      force to be held in readiness, equipped and organized to meet the
    emergency that so arises, and to retrieve so much as may be of those
    assets of scholarly equipment and personnel that make the substantial
   code of Western civilization. And so it becomes a question of what the
    Americans are minded to do about it. It is their opportunity, and at
   the same time it carries the gravest responsibility that has yet fallen
    on the nation; for the spiritual fortunes of Christendom are bound up
   with the line of policy which this surviving contingent of American men
     of learning shall see fit to pursue. They are not all that is to be
   left over when the powers of decay shall begin to retire, nor are they,
      perhaps, to be the best and most valuable contingent among these
    prospective survivors; but they occupy a strategic position, in that
   they are today justly to be credited with disinterested motives, beyond
    the rest, at the same time that they command those material resources
    without which the quest of knowledge can hope to achieve little along
   the modern lines of inquiry. By force of circumstances they are thrown
   into the position of keepers of the ways and means whereby the republic
   of learning is to retrieve its fortunes. By force of circumstances they
   are in a position, if they so choose, to shelter many of those masters
    of free inquiry whom the one-eyed forces of reaction and partisanship
       overseas will seek to suppress and undo; and they are also in a
     position, if they so choose, to install something in the way of an
      international clearing house and provisional headquarters for the
     academic community throughout that range of civilized peoples whose
    goodwill they now enjoy -- a place of refuge and a place of meeting,
    confluence and dissemination for those views and ideas that live and
              move and have their being in the higher learning.

        There is, therefore, a work of reconstruction to be taken care of
       in the realm of learning, no less than in the working scheme of
        economic and civil institutions. And as in this other work of
    reconstruction, so here; if it is to be done without undue confusion
   and blundering it is due to be set afoot before the final emergency is
     at hand. But there is the difference that, whereas the framework of
      civil institutions may still, with passable success, be drawn on
    national lines and confined within the national frontiers; and while
   the economic organization can also, without fatal loss, be confined in
          a similar fashion, in response to short-sighted patriotic
   preconceptions; the interests of science, and therefore of the academic
      community, do not run on national lines and can not similarly be
   confined within geographical or political boundaries. In the nature of
   the case these interests are of an international character and can not
     be taken care of except by unrestricted collusion and collaboration
     among the learned men of all those peoples whom it may concern. Yet
   there is no mistaking the fact that the spirit of invidious patriotism
    has invaded these premises, too, and promises to bungle the outcome;
    which makes the needed work of reconstruction all the more difficult
   and all the more imperative. Unhappily, the state of sentiment on both
      sides of the line of cleavage will presumably not admit a cordial
    understanding and co-operation between the German contingent and the
    rest of the civilized nations, for some time to come. But the others
    are in a frame of mind that should lend itself generously to a larger
        measure of co-operation in this respect now than ever before.

       So it may not seem out of place to offer a suggestion, tentatively
   and under correction, looking to this end. A beginning may well be made
   by a joint enterprise among American scholars and universities for the
    installation of a freely endowed central establishment where teachers
    and students of all nationalities, including Americans with the rest,
       may pursue their chosen work as guests of the American academic
       community at large, or as guests of the American people in the
    character of a democracy of culture. There should also be nothing to
    hinder the installation of more than one of these academic houses of
    refuge and entertainment; nor should there be anything to hinder the
     enterprise being conducted on such terms of amity, impartiality and
   community interest as will make recourse to it an easy matter of course
    for any scholars whom its opportunities may attract. The same central
     would at the same time, and for the time being, take care of those
   channels of communication throughout the academic world that have been
     falling into enforced neglect under the strain of the war. So also
   should provision be made, perhaps best under the same auspices, for the
    (transient) taking-over of the many essential lines of publicity and
      publication on which the men engaged in scholarly and scientific
    inquiry have learned to depend, and which have also been falling into
                   something of a decline during the war.

       Measures looking to this end might well be made, at the same time,
       to serve no less useful a purpose within the American Academic
     community. As is well known, there prevails today an extensive and
    wasteful competitive duplication of plant, organization and personnel
      among the American universities, as regards both publications and
    courses of instruction. Particularly is this true in respect of that
      advanced work of the universities that has to do with the higher
     learning. At the same time, these universities are now pinched for
   funds, due to the current inflation of prices. So that any proposal of
    this nature, which might be taken advantage of as an occasion for the
     pooling of common issues among the universities, might hopefully be
    expected to be welcomed as a measure of present relief from some part
          of the pecuniary strain under which they are now working.

        But competition is well ingrained in the habitual outlook of the
   American schools. To take the issue to neutral ground, therefore, where
      this competitive animus may hopefully be counted on to find some
   salutary abatement, it may be suggested that a practicable nucleus for
    this proposed joint enterprise can well be found in one or another --
    perhaps in one and another -- of those extra-academic foundations for
   research of which there already are several in existence, -- as, e.g.,
     the Carnegie Institution. With somewhat enlarged powers, or perhaps
    rather with some abatement of restrictions, and with such additional
    funds as may be required, the necessary work and organization should
     readily be taken care of by such an institution. Further growth and
        ramification would be left to future counsel and advisement.

         The contemplated enterprise would necessarily require a certain
      planning and organization of work and something in the way of an
   administrative and clerical staff,a setting up of something in the way
     of "organization tables"; but there can be no question of offering
      detailed proposals on that head here. Yet the caution may well be
     entered here that few specifications are better than many, in these
   premises, and that the larger the latitude allowed from the outset, the
   fewer the seeds of eventual defeat, -- as is abundantly illustrated by
                                 contraries.

        It is also evident that such an enterprise will involve provision
        for some expenditure of funds; presumably a somewhat generous
    expenditure; which comes near implying that recourse should be had to
     the public revenues, or to resources that may legitimately be taken
   over by the public authorities from private hands where they now serve
    no useful purpose. There are many items of material resources in the
   country that come legitimately under this head. At the same time it is
    well in this connection to call to mind that there is no prospect of
     the country's being in any degree impoverished in the course of the
    war; so that there need be no apprehension of a shortage of means for
    the carrying on of such an enterprise, if only the available sources
      are drawn on without prejudice. In the mind of any disinterested
     student of the American economic situation, there can be no serious
     apprehension that the American people, collectively, will be at all
     worse off in point of disposable means at the close of the war than
   they were at its beginning; quite the contrary in fact. To any one who
    will look to the facts it is evident that the experience of the war,
     and the measures taken and to be taken, are leading to a heightened
    industrial productiveness and a concomitant elimination of waste. The
    resulting net gain in productive efficiency has not gone at all far,
    and there need be no apprehension of its going to great lengths; but,
   for more or less, it is going so far as safely to promise a larger net
    annual production of useful goods in the immediate future than in the
     immediate past; and the disposable means of any people is always a
      matter of the net annual production, and it need be a question of
    nothing else. The manner in which this net product is, and is to be,
    shared among the classes and individuals of the community is another
                    question, which does not belong here.

        A question of graver weight and of greater perplexity touches the
         presumptive attitude of the several universities and their
    discretionary authorities in the face of any proposed measure of this
   kind; where the scope of the enterprise is so far beyond their habitual
   range of interest. When one calls to mind the habitual parochialism of
    the governing boards of these seminaries of the higher learning, and
    the meticulous manoeuvres of their executives seeking each to enhance
    his own prestige and the prestige of his own establishment, there is
   not much of an evident outlook for large and generous measures looking
   to the common good. And yet it is also to be called to mind that these
    governing boards and executives are, after all, drawn from the common
       stock of humanity, picked men as they may be; and that they are
    subject, after all, to somewhat the same impulses and infirmities as
    the common run, picked though they may be with a view to parochialism
      and blameless futility. Now, what is overtaking the temper of the
   common run under the strain of the war situation should be instructive
    as to what may be also looked for at the bands of these men in whose
   discretion rest the fortunes of the American universities. There should
     be at least a fighting chance that, with something larger, manlier,
   more substantial, to occupy their attention and to shape the day's work
     for them, these seminaries of learning may, under instant pressure,
   turn their best efforts to their ostensible purpose, "the increase and
       diffusion of knowledge among men," and to forego their habitual
    preoccupation with petty intrigue and bombastic publicity, until the
                            return of idler days.

                                   NOTES:

      1. An inquiry of this kind has been attempted elsewhere: Cf. The
      Instinct of Workmanship. chapter vii, pp. 321-340; "The Place of
   Science in Modern Civilization", American Journal of Sociology. Vol. XI
    (March, 1906), pp. 585-609; "The Evolution of the Scientific Point of
    View," University of California Chronicle (1908), Vol. X, No. 4, pp.
                                  395-416.

     2. Cf. The Instinct of Workmanship and the State of the Industrial
                   Arts, ch.i and pp. 30-45, 52-62, 84-89.

   3. In the crude surmises of the pioneers in pragmatism this proposition
     was implicitly denied; in their later and more advisedly formulated
       positions the expositors of pragmatism have made peace with it.

    4. The essential function of the university is to bring together, for
    the transmission of experience and impulse, the sages of the passing
      and the picked youths of the coming generation. By the extent and
      fulness with which they establish these social contacts, and thus
   transmit the wave of cumulative experience and idealist impulse -- the
   real sources of moral and intellectual progress -- the universities are
    to be judged. -- Victor Branford, Interpretations and Forecasts, ch.
                  VI. "The Present as a Transition." p 288.

              5. Cf., Geo. T. Ladd, University Control, p. 349.

   6. Cf., e.g., J. McKeen Cattell, University Control, Part III, ch. V.,
     "Concerning the American University." "The university is those who
   teach and those who learn and the work they do." "The university is its
     men and their work. But certain externals are necessary or at least
        usual -- buildings and equipment, a president and trustees."

         "The papers by other writers associated with Mr Cattell in this
   volume run to the same effect whenever they touch the same topic; and,
    indeed, it would be difficult to find a deliberate expression to the
           contrary among men entitled to speak in these premises.

         It may be in place to add here that the volume referred to, on
      University Control, has been had in mind throughout the following
       analysis and has served as ground and material for much of the
                                  argument.

              7. Cf. The Instinct of Workmanship, ch. vi, vii.

     8. With the current reactionary trend of things political and civil
      toward mediaeval-barbarian policies and habits of thought in the
   Fatherland, something of a correlative change has also latterly come in
     evidence in the German universities; so that what is substantially
     "cameralistic science" -- training and information for prospective
    civil servants and police magistrates is in some appreciable measure
       displacing disinterested inquiry in the field of economics and
     political theory. This is peculiarly true of those corporations of
      learning that come closely in touch with the Cultus Ministerium.

    9. Cf. "Some Considerations On the Function of the State University."
      (Inaugural Address of Edmund Janes James, Ph.D., LL.D.), Science,
                             November 17, 1905.
