   #RDF+XML OpenURL ContextObject MPEG-21 DIDL JSON-LD METS OpenURL
   ContextObject in Span MODS Top Search

   Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane Australia
   QUT Home Contact
   A university for the real world
   Skip to content

   Home Browse About
     * Login

RuleOMS: a rule-based online management system

   Islam, Mohammad Badiul & Governatori, Guido (2015) RuleOMS: a
   rule-based online management system. In Atkinson, K (Ed.) Proceedings
   of the 15th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
   Law. Association for Computing Machinery, United States of America, pp.
   187-191.
   [img] Published Version (PDF 670kB)
   RuleOMS- A Rule-Based Online Management System.pdf.
   Administrators only | Request a copy from author
   Contact Author

   View at publisher

Description

   We propose an architecture for a rule-based online management systems
   (RuleOMS). Typically, many domain areas face the problem that
   stakeholders maintain databases of their business core information and
   they have to take decisions or create reports according to guidelines,
   policies or regulations. To address this issue we propose the
   integration of databases, in particular relational databases, with a
   logic reasoner and rule engine. We argue that defeasible logic is an
   appropriate formalism to model rules, in particular when the rules are
   meant to model regulations. The resulting RuleOMS provides an efficient
   and flexible solution to the problem at hand using defeasible
   inference. A case study of an online child care management system is
   used to illustrate the proposed architecture.

   Impact and interest:
   5 citations in Scopus
   Search Google Scholar™
   (BUTTON)

   Citation counts are sourced monthly from Scopus and Web of Science®
   citation databases.

   These databases contain citations from different subsets of available
   publications and different time periods and thus the citation count
   from each is usually different. Some works are not in either database
   and no count is displayed. Scopus includes citations from articles
   published in 1996 onwards, and Web of Science® generally from 1980
   onwards.

   Citations counts from the Google Scholar™ indexing service can be
   viewed at the linked Google Scholar™ search.
     * Notify us of incorrect data
     * How to use citation counts
     * More information

   More statistics...
   ID Code: 85194
   Item Type: Chapter in Book, Report or Conference volume (Conference
   contribution)
   Measurements or Duration: 5 pages
   Keywords: Child Care, Compliance, Defeasible Logic, Online Management
   System, Reasoning, Regulations, Rule-based
   DOI: 10.1145/2746090.2746120
   ISBN: 978-1-4503-3522-5
   Pure ID: 32791379
   Divisions: Past > Institutes > Institute for Future Environments
   Past > QUT Faculties & Divisions > Science & Engineering Faculty
   Copyright Owner: Consult author(s) regarding copyright matters
   Copyright Statement: This work is covered by copyright. Unless the
   document is being made available under a Creative Commons Licence, you
   must assume that re-use is limited to personal use and that permission
   from the copyright owner must be obtained for all other uses. If the
   document is available under a Creative Commons License (or other
   specified license) then refer to the Licence for details of permitted
   re-use. It is a condition of access that users recognise and abide by
   the legal requirements associated with these rights. If you believe
   that this work infringes copyright please provide details by email to
   qut.copyright@qut.edu.au
   Deposited On: 09 Jul 2015 00:30
   Last Modified: 04 Jan 2025 18:46

                                    Export: EndNote | Dublin Core | BibTeX

                                  Repository Staff Only: item control page

     * Home
     * Browse research
     * About

     * TEQSA Provider ID: PRV12079 (Australian University)
     * CRICOS No. 00213J
     * ABN 83 791 724 622

     * Accessibility
     * Copyright
     * Disclaimer
     * Privacy
     * Right to Information
