   ____________________ Search Powered by JRank

Encyclopedia of Espionage, Intelligence, and Security

Espionage Information

   Espionage Encyclopedia » Ne-Ns

Netherlands, Intelligence and Security

   The Kingdom of the Netherlands was established following the Napoleonic
   Wars in 1815. Since its founding, the Netherlands has been influential
   in international politics, but has long maintained a policy of stated
   neutrality.

New People's Army (NPA)

   The New People's Army (NPA) is the military wing of the Communist Party
   of the Philippines (CPP). A Maoist group formed in March, 1969, its aim
   includes overthrowing the Philippine government through protracted
   guerrilla warfare.

New Zealand, Intelligence and Security

   New Zealand gained its independence from Britain in 1907, but remains a
   member of the British Commonwealth. A longtime, close ally with
   Britain, Australia, and the United States, New Zealand retreated from
   international politics during the last two decades to address ethnic
   tensions between European-descended New Zealanders and the native Maori
   people.

NFIB (United States National Foreign Intelligence Board)

   The National Foreign Intelligence Board (NFIB) was created by the
   National Security Act of 1947. The NFIB acts as a communications
   channel among various national intelligence agencies and facilitates
   interagency exchange of information.

NIC (National Intelligence Council)

   The National Intelligence Council (NIC) oversees the estimative process
   of the United States intelligence community, and produces National
   Intelligence Estimates (NIEs). The NIC answers directly to the Director
   of Central Intelligence (DCI) in his capacity as head of the
   intelligence community.

Nicaragua, Intelligence and Security

   Nicaragua gained independence from Spain in 1821, and became a republic
   in 1838. Late-twentieth-century politics in the region have been marked
   by violence and turmoil.

Nigeria, Intelligence and Security

   In 1998, Nigeria overthrew its ruling dictatorship, which possessed
   close ties to the nation's military. The transitional government that
   gained power attempted to restore the long-suspended Constitution of
   1979 and institute democratic reforms.

Night Vision Scopes

   Night vision scopes are devices that enable machines or people to "see
   in the dark," that is, to form images when illumination in the visible
   band of the electromagnetic spectrum is inadequate. Although it is not
   possible to form images in absolute darkness, that is, in the absence
   of any electromagnetic radiation whatsoever, it is possible to form
   images from radiation wavelengths to which the human eye is
   insensitive, or to amplify visible-light levels so low that they appear
   dark to the human eye.

NIH (National Institutes of Health)

   The National Institutes of Health (NIH) is a federal agency that serves
   as the fiscal agent of medical research in the United States. The
   mission of the NIH is to foster medical and behavioral research on
   living systems and to use that knowledge to prevent, identify,
   diagnose, and treat illness and disability.

NIJ (National Institute of Justice)

   The National Institute of Justice (NIJ) serves the United States
   Department of Justice in the areas of research, development, and
   evaluation. Established under the authority of the Omnibus Crime
   Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, its purpose is to provide
   independent, evidencebased tools to assist state and local law
   enforcement.

NIMA (National Imagery and Mapping Agency)

   The National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA) was formed in October,
   1996, to provide the United States military and intelligence agencies
   with up-to-date and accurate imaging and geospatial information. NIMA
   is a Department of Defense agency and is a member of the United States
   intelligence community.

NIMH (National Institute of Mental Health)

   The National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) falls under the umbrella
   of the government's medical research agency, the National Institutes of
   Health (NIH). The NIMH is the branch of the NIH that focuses on the
   brain, behavior, and mental health.

NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology), United States

   The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) is a
   non-regulatory federal agency under the aegis of the Undersecretary for
   Technology in the U.S. Department of Commerce.

NIST Computer Security Division, United States

   The Computer Security Division (CSD) is one of eight divisions within
   the Information Technology Laboratory of the National Institute of
   Standards and Technology (NIST), itself a bureau of the Chamber of
   Commerce. CSD is concerned with raising awareness of information
   technology (IT) risks, vulnerabilities, and protection requirements,
   especially for new and emerging forms of technology.

Nixon Administration (1969–1974), United States National Security Policy

   Richard Nixon took office in 1969 as the country struggled to deal with
   the effects of the war in Vietnam. The inability of the United States
   to quickly win the war forced a review of national security policy.

NMIC (National Maritime Intelligence Center)

   The National Maritime Intelligence Center (NMIC) brings together
   several military intelligence operations for the United States: Navy,
   Marine Corps, and Coast Guard. The first of these, being by far the
   largest, is the dominant participant in NMIC, whose headquarters in
   Suitland, Maryland, are home to the Office of Naval Intelligence (ONI).

NNSA (United States National Nuclear Security Administration)

   Created in 1999 and put into operation the following year, the National
   Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) was a response to security
   concerns with regard to United States nuclear materials and
   information. In order to better protect these sensitive properties,
   Congress established NNSA as a separate agency within the Department of
   Energy (DOE).

NOAA (National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration)

   The National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) monitors
   environmental, climatic, and weather conditions in the United States
   and around the world. The administration manages an extensive network
   of satellites, sensory aircraft, and specialized monitoring equipment
   to provide information on meteorological events and their impact.

Noise Generators

   Generating noise is a simple, cheap, and versatile method of blocking
   signals or shielding communication from a range of devices. From the
   disruption of radio broadcasts to the masking of conversations, noise
   generators use a simple concept to great effect.

Nongovernmental Global Intelligence and Security

   Global intelligence and security is not purely the province of
   governmental agencies. An important advisory role is occupied by think
   tanks, private corporations, university departments, and other groups.

Nonproliferation and National Security, United States

   The United States government has long had an interest in
   nonproliferation as a means of ensuring national security. The logic
   governing this interest is straightforward: as long as weapons continue
   to proliferate among foreign and hostile powers, U.S.

NORAD

   The North American Air Defense Agreement, signed on May 12, 1958 by the
   United States and Canada, created a continental air defense warning and
   surveillance system in response to Cold War fears of an airborne attack
   by the Soviet Union. The resulting North American Air/Aerospace Defense
   Command (NORAD) has since shifted strategies from guarding against
   long-range bombers to warning of ballistic missile attacks and
   maintaining space surveillance.

North Korea, Intelligence and Security

   The nation of North Korea was established on September 9, 1948, during
   the grab for satellite nations at the beginning of the Cold War.
   Supported by the Soviet Union, North Korea established a communist
   regime under dictator Kim Il-sung.

North Korean Nuclear Weapons Programs

Norway, Intelligence and Security

   During World War I, Norway maintained a stated policy of neutrality in
   international affairs. When WWII erupted in 1939, the Norwegian
   government again asserted that the nation would remain neutral in the
   conflict.

NRO (National Reconnaissance Office)

   The National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) is a member of the United
   States' fourteen-member intelligence community. Established in 1960,
   the existence of the NRO was not declassified until 1992.

NSA (United States National Security Agency)

   Legendary for its secrecy, the National Security Agency (NSA) is the
   leading cryptologic organization in the United States intelligence
   community. Focused on cryptologic and cryptanalytic missions, it is the
   nation's leading employer of mathematicians, yet little is known about
   the inner workings of this secretive agency.

NSC (National Security Council)

   Established by the National Security Act of 1947, the National Security
   Council (NSC) was intended to serve as the principal advisory board for
   the president of the United States on matters of national security and
   foreign policy. In practice, the importance of the NSC and the National
   Security Advisor has depended on the degree of power the chief
   executive accords to it.

NSC (National Security Council), History

   The history of the United States National Security Council (NSC) lends
   itself to widely diverging views of the NSC, depending on the
   presidential administration in question. Held in suspicion by President
   Harry S.

NSF (National Science Foundation)

   The National Science Foundation (NSF) directs and funds science
   research. An independent agency in the United States government, the
   NSF was established May 10, 1950, by passage of the National Science
   Foundation Act.
   Copyright © 2025 Advameg, Inc.
