    Paperform logo
   ProductsSolutionsIntegrationsTemplatesResourcesPricing
   Sign inTry Paperform Free
   Products
   PaperformPaperform is an online form builder like no other. It combines
   serious digital smarts with beautiful design to create endless
   possibilities.PapersignSimplify document signing with Papersign, so you
   can spend less time in email chains and more time on the important
   stuff.
   Solutions
   Web FormsScheduling FormsOrder FormsPayment FormsCalculation
   FormsSubscription FormsConditional LogicLanding page FormsQuiz
   MakerPoll MakerSurvey MakerTest MakerSee all solutions

All Solutions

   Explore all the solutions you can create with Paperform: surveys,
   quizzes, tests, payment forms, scheduling forms, and a whole lot more.

   Explore all the solutions you can create with Paperform: surveys,
   quizzes, tests, payment forms, scheduling forms, and a whole lot more.
   See all solutions
   Integrations
   Google Sheets
   Google Sheets
   Mailchimp
   Mailchimp
   Active Campaign
   Active Campaign
   Slack
   Slack
   Trello
   Trello
   Hubspot
   Hubspot
   Notion
   Notion
   Airtable
   Airtable
   Asana
   Asana
   Intercom
   Intercom
   Dropbox
   Dropbox
   ConvertKit
   ConvertKit
   See all integrations
   See all integrations
   Connect with over 2,000 popular apps and software to improve
   productivity and automate workflows

   Connect with over 2,000 popular apps and software to improve
   productivity and automate workflows
   See all integrations
   Templates
   Resources
   BlogReal-life stories, trends, and strategies to help you grow your
   business.CareersJoin the company that prioritises 'life-work'
   balance.Online Signature GeneratorCreate and download a signature.
   Merch StoreGet your hands on Paperform swag.Getting StartedHelpful
   guides to get you on track.Help CenterWe've got all the answers to your
   questions.
   Pricing
   Sign InTry Paperform Free

Products

   PaperformPaperform is an online form builder like no other. It combines
   serious digital smarts with beautiful design to create endless
   possibilities.PapersignSimplify document signing with Papersign, so you
   can spend less time in email chains and more time on the important
   stuff.

Solutions

   Web FormsScheduling FormsOrder FormsPayment FormsCalculation
   FormsSubscription FormsConditional LogicLanding page FormsQuiz
   MakerPoll MakerSurvey MakerTest MakerSee all solutions

All Solutions

   Explore all the solutions you can create with Paperform: surveys,
   quizzes, tests, payment forms, scheduling forms, and a whole lot more.

   Explore all the solutions you can create with Paperform: surveys,
   quizzes, tests, payment forms, scheduling forms, and a whole lot more.
   See all solutions

Integrations

   Google Sheets
   Google Sheets
   Mailchimp
   Mailchimp
   Active Campaign
   Active Campaign
   Slack
   Slack
   Trello
   Trello
   Hubspot
   Hubspot
   Notion
   Notion
   Airtable
   Airtable
   Asana
   Asana
   Intercom
   Intercom
   Dropbox
   Dropbox
   ConvertKit
   ConvertKit
   See all integrations
   See all integrations
   Connect with over 2,000 popular apps and software to improve
   productivity and automate workflows

   Connect with over 2,000 popular apps and software to improve
   productivity and automate workflows
   See all integrations

Resources

   BlogReal-life stories, trends, and strategies to help you grow your
   business.CareersJoin the company that prioritises 'life-work'
   balance.Online Signature GeneratorCreate and download a signature.
   Merch StoreGet your hands on Paperform swag.

Need Help?

   Getting StartedHelpful guides to get you on track.Help CenterWe've got
   all the answers to your questions.

Logic Guide

   Help Making Forms Using the Editor Configuring Behavior
   ____________________Search for articles

   IFRAME:
   https://www.loom.com/embed/51bacda62e2f463c881e8627f81eb769?hide_owner=
   true&hide_share=true&hide_title=true&hideEmbedTopBar=true

   Introduction
   How it worksSetting a conditionMultiple conditions
   Visibility logicQuestion visibility logicSection visibility logicPage
   visibility logicUsing visibility logic
   Applying logic to actionsEmailsIntegrationsSuccess Pages & Redirects
   Complex conditions
   GotchasWorking with similar question titlesWorking with numbersBlank or
   unfinished conditions

Introduction

   Conditional logic can be used to change the way your form behaves
   depending on how it is filled out. You may want to show or hide a
   certain question for example, depending on how another question is
   answered. The same visibility logic can be applied to entire sections,
   or even pages of content. You can also use logic to determine which
   actions trigger after the form is submitted.

   In this guide, you will learn how to:
     * Set conditions
     * Effectively combine multiple conditions
     * Apply visibility logic to questions, sections, and pages
     * Conditionally trigger specific emails, integrations, success pages,
       and redirects
     * Combine logic with Calculations for more complex conditions

     Custom Pricing Rules can also be used to conditionally alter the
     total price on payment forms.

How it works

Setting a condition

   Logic can be toggled on in many places throughout the form editor. If
   you select it, you’ll see a series of dropdown menus used to set a
   condition. When this condition is met, the content will be visible, or
   the action will be triggered.
   An example condition is set from three dropdown menus: "Experience
   Level ... is ... Beginner"

   Each condition is made up of three parts: the question, the operator,
   and the value.

   First, you'll choose the question. Logic can be based on any field's
   answer, including Hidden fields and Calculations. If you've set up any
   Scoring on your form, you'll also see "Score" listed as an option at
   the bottom of the list.

   Next, select an operator (is, contains, etc.), and then type or select
   the value that should be compared to the answer given on the form. Keep
   in mind that this value is case-sensitive, and it must match the
   expected answer exactly.

     Need the condition to be case-insensitive? Use a Calculation field
     to transform the original answer to all uppercase using the UPPER()
     function. Then, target that Calculation in the logic, and set the
     value to the uppercase version of the answer. Read on to learn more
     about combining logic with Calculations.

Multiple conditions

   You can click the “Add another condition” button to set more rules.
   Additional conditions can be separated using “And” or “Or.”
     * And: all conditions must be met.
     * Or: at least one condition must be met.

   If you need to combine “And” and “Or” in a single set of conditions,
   it’s recommended that you group some of them together by selecting
   “Multiple Condition Group” at the very end of the question dropdown
   menu. Kind of like parentheses in a math equation, this tells the form
   which part of the logic to evaluate first.
   Conditional logic that uses the "Multiple Conditions" option to group
   the second and third condition together like: A or (B and C)

   Now that we've got a basic understanding of how conditions work, let's
   take a look at the different ways logic can be applied.

Visibility logic

Question visibility logic

   Perfect for a follow-up question to a specific answer, visibility logic
   is most often applied to a single question.

   To set up question visibility logic:
    1. Click the question that should be hidden or revealed.
    2. Make sure “Hide this question” is toggled off (if applicable).
    3. Toggle on “Question visibility logic."
    4. Set the condition(s) that should be met for the question to appear.
    5. Click "Done."

   Once added, you can edit your visibility logic by clicking on the
   "Configure Logic → x conditions" button below the "Question visibility
   logic" toggle.
   The "Question visibility logic" toggle is available in the
   configuration panel when you click a field. A button will appear below
   this allowing you to edit the conditions.

   If you'd like to control visibility logic for a group of questions or
   any other content on the form page, then you'll want to use section or
   page breaks instead.

Section visibility logic

   Section breaks are perfect for applying logic to a group of questions
   without changing the page. They can also cover other content, so you
   can use them to apply visibility logic to headings, paragraph text,
   images, embedded videos, etc.

   To add a section break, type "/break" into a blank line in the editor,
   then select "Section break." The red line that appears in the editor
   represents the beginning of a new section.

   You can configure the break to add visibility logic that will apply to
   everything below this line, up until the next section or page break.
   A pair of section breaks wrapped around a heading and a few questions.
   Clicking this opens the configuration panel. You can delete the section
   break by clicking the X that appears to the left.

Page visibility logic

   When an entire page is "hidden," that means that it will be skipped
   completely when the user clicks the next page button (→). You can use
   visibility logic to determine which pages will be displayed or skipped.

   To add a page break, type "/break" into a blank line in the editor,
   then select "Page break." A page break appears as a blue line when
   editing the form.

   Configure the break to add visibility logic that will apply to
   everything below this line, up until the following page break (or the
   end of the form).

     When working with any breaks, try to avoid any redundant logic. If
     logic is applied to a page, it will automatically be applied to any
     sections and questions on that page. Repeating the same logic rules
     in those sub-sections and individual questions can make things more
     difficult to edit later. This also applies to individual questions
     inside sections.

Using visibility logic

   The most common use of logic is to conditionally show or hide certain
   questions, sections, or pages of the form.
   Animated GIF of some visibility logic in practice on a live form. As
   each question is answered, more questions and text appear.

Applying logic to actions

Emails

   Custom emails can be configured under After Submission → Emails. When
   adding a new email or editing an existing one, you can toggle on “Email
   Logic” at the very bottom of the page. After the form is submitted, the
   email will be sent only if the condition(s) have been met.
   A custom email with Email Logic toggled on and the "Configure Logic"
   button displayed.

   In the example above, an email will be sent to the manager of the
   Downtown branch if someone uses the form to sign up for classes at that
   location.

   You can set as many custom emails as you like, and each one can be sent
   under different conditions.

Integrations

   Much like an email, you can set a direct integration to only fire under
   certain conditions. For example, you might want to add the submitter’s
   email to your mailing list in MailChimp, but only if they indicate on
   the form that they’d like to sign up.
   Conditional logic in an integration: "Would you like to sign up for the
   newsletter? ... is ... Sign me up!"

   To add conditional logic to your integration:
    1. Head to After Submission → Integrations & Webhooks.
    2. To update an existing integration, find it below the list of apps,
       then select “Edit” from the cogwheel icon to the right. Or, to
       create a new one, select the app and follow the prompts.
    3. Scroll down to the very bottom of the page and toggle on “Use
       conditional logic.”
    4. Set the condition(s) that should be met in order for the
       integration to fire.

Success Pages & Redirects

   Users on selected pricing plans have access to Dynamic Success Pages &
   Redirects. With this feature, logic can be used to determine which page
   displays after the form is submitted. An automatic redirect can
   optionally happen after that, with the same conditions applied.

   Quizzes are a common use case for dynamic success pages—you may want to
   show one of several possible pages of results to the submitter,
   depending on their answers. The logic could be based on their final
   Score, the result of a Calculation, or the answers themselves.
   The configuration for a dynamic success page, titled "Quiz Result: 100%
   Correct!" Email logic is toggled on, and the Configure Logic button is
   showing that 2 conditions are set.

   To set this up:
    1. Head to After Submission → Success Pages & Redirects.
    2. Toggle on "Dynamic Success Pages & Redirects."
    3. Click the "Add Page +" button to set up the first page.
    4. Toggle on “Page has conditions when it should be used” to apply
       logic to this page.
    5. Design the success page, save it, and then repeat for the next
       conditional page.

   You can also use this for conditional redirects. By enabling "Redirect
   to another URL," the user will be sent somewhere else automatically
   after a success page has been shown for a specified amount of time.

     Conditional redirects can fire quickly after submission, but the
     success page will always load for at least a moment before the
     redirect can begin. For a more seamless transition, try deleting
     everything on the success page so that it is completely blank. Then,
     set "Redirect after this many seconds" to 0.

Complex conditions

   You may need to apply some logic that is a bit more complicated than
   what you can accomplish using a few dropdown menus. On selected pricing
   plans, robust Calculation fields are available for just about anything
   you can think of—applying math to answers, transforming answers using
   functions, etc. Once you have the answer you need from the Calculation,
   you can select that field in the logic dropdown instead of the original
   question.

   For example, let’s say we need a parent or guardian's e-signature if
   the student filling out the form is under 18 years old.

   We can pull the submitter's date of birth into a Calculation field set
   up like this one to determine their age:
dob = {{ date_question_id }};

DATEDIFF( NOW(), dob, "years" );

   Then, we’ll apply some visibility logic to the Signature field on our
   form using the Calculation's result:
   Question visibility logic with the condition "Age (Calculation) ... is
   less than ... 18"

   Calculations are extremely versatile, but they can be a bit
   overwhelming to learn at first. If you’re having any trouble, feel free
   to ask for help via the live chat in the bottom right of the screen or
   send us an email at support@paperform.co.

Gotchas

Working with similar question titles

   Many forms include repeated or similar questions, which can make it
   difficult to know if you’re selecting the correct question for a
   condition. We include each field's Question ID in dropdowns to help you
   identify which question you are selecting.
   The first "Choose question" dropdown in visibility logic, showing a
   list that includes multiple copies of the same question title, but with
   different Question IDs..

   You can also temporarily add a number or another identifier to the
   beginning of each repeated question's title, so that you know exactly
   what you’re looking for in the logic dropdown or the question panel.
   The question panel showing a list of numbered questions with otherwise
   similar titles.

   Once all of the logic is set up and tested, you can go back through and
   delete the numbers to return the questions to their original names.

Working with numbers

   The operators "is more than" and "is less than" are options when
   selecting question types that typically return numeric values (Number,
   Slider, Score, etc).

   If you'd like to use this kind of logic with a different question type
   (like Dropdown or Scale), try using a Calculation field to turn that
   answer into a numeric value first.
NUMBERVALUE( {{ question_id }} )

   It’s also important to note that "is more than" and "is less than" are
   not inclusive, meaning that a matching number will not be valid. For
   example, let’s say you wanted to show one success page if the
   submitter’s Score is less than 10, and another if they score 10 or more
   points. You would want to use:
     * Result A: “Score is less than 10”
     * Result B: “Score is 10” OR “Score is more than 10”

   Notice that two conditions are required for Result B in this example.
   If you only used “less than 10” for the first result and “more than 10”
   for the second, then a score of exactly 10 wouldn’t trigger either
   page.

     When working with whole numbers only, you can also get away with
     using something like "more than 9" to check for an answer that is 10
     or higher. If there's any chance that the answer will be a decimal
     though, stick to the two-condition method shown above. An answer of
     9.5 is not "10 or higher," but it would meet the condition "more
     than 9."

Blank or unfinished conditions

   Screenshot of some unfinished conditional logic: "Score ... is ...
   [Answer...] ... OR ... [Choose question]"

   If you find that some content is simply never visible, or a certain
   action never fires, double-check the logic to make sure that all of the
   conditions are set up completely (including the value for each answer).
   When a question is deleted, or its type or options get changed, this
   may affect logic that depends on that question in another part of the
   form.

   If logic is toggled on but no condition is set, then this logic will
   always fail. The same is true for conditions that are missing a value
   for the answer. If you don't need a certain condition, delete the whole
   line. If you don't need any conditions, toggle the logic setting off
   completely.

Related Articles

   How do I insert page breaks and section breaks (pagination & question
   branching)?
   Use breaks to divide a form into either pages or sections that can be
   shown conditionally based on responses.
   How do I send an email when the form is submitted?
   When a form is submitted, a submission summary email is sent to the
   owner of the form. This email can be turned off.
   What are direct integrations?
   Direct integrations on Paperform allow you to integrate directly
   between Paperform and numerous, popular services.
   How can I calculate a score for my form based on respondents' answers?
   There are two methods to calculate scores conditionally based on your
   respondents' answers: Scoring, and Calculation Fields.
   How do I set up Custom Pricing Rules?
   Need to create pricing dependant upon your customers needs? Offering
   services that need to have fees built in? We’ve got you covered with
   Custom Pricing Rules.
