   allows users to write inference rules and queries in English-like
   syntax. We will demonstrate how these reasoning rules have equivalent
   representation both as RDF descriptions and as logic programs. We will
   also show how an automated compilation between these translations is
   possible.
--
   structure of an XML document.

   Logic programs consist of facts and rules where valid inference rules
   are used to arrives into new facts i.e. query results.

--

   The second component consists of a "logical interpretation" of RDF data
   (optionally enriched with the semantic schema) into logic programming.
   This way, the understood semantics of RDF is unwielded into its logical
   components (a logic program, indeed). This means that every reasonment
   on RDF data can be performed acting upon the corresponding logical
   view, the logic program, providing a neat and powerful way to reason
   about data.

--

   The first correspondance in Metalog is between the basic RDF data model
   and the predicates in logic. The RDF data model consists of so-called
   statements. Statements are triples where there is a subject (the
   "resource"), a predicate (the "property"), and an object (the
--
   example, the RDF statement expressing the fact that Tim Berners-Lee
   invented the Web (formally, the RDF triple {invented, Tim Berners-Lee,
   Web}) is seen in logic programming as the predicate invented(Tim
   Berners-Lee, Web).

   Once we have estalished the basic correspondance between the basic RDF
   data model and predicates in logic, the next step becomes easy: we can
   extend RDF so that the mapping to logic is able to take advantage of
   all of the logical relationships present in logical systems: that is to
   say, beyond the ability of expressing static facts, we want the ability
   to encode dynamic reasoning rules, like in logic programming.

   In order to do so, we need at least:
--
   schema elements since they will be presented later, what the reader
   should keep in mind is just that the Metalog schema provides the
   "meta-logic" operators to reason with RDF statements.

   Technically, this is quite easy to do: the metalog schema is just a
--
   would like to have is a subset of predicate calculus that is still
   expressible enough, and also computationally feasible: our choice went
   to logic programming. Logic programming (see e.g. [1]) is a well known
   programming paradigm that selects a subset of full first-order
   predicate calculus (so called Horn clauses); it is a very powerful and
   expressive paradigm, and has the further advantage that it has been
   widely studied in the database community (a subset of logic
   programming, datalog, has even the advantage of having computations
   always terminating, a feature of obvious interest for Web queries).
--
   and this "metalog RDF" encoding, with the constraint that the
   expressibility of the language must fit within the one provided by
   logic programming.

   The metalog syntax has been explicitly designed with the purpose of
--
   speak("John",Y).

   Running this query in the corresponding logic program gives the result
   that Y="English", that is to say, the predicate speak("John","English")
   is true.
--
Related work

   The use of Web infrastructure to accommodate logic programs has been
   suggested by (Sandevall, 1996) and (Loke & Davidson, 1996). The latter
   approach suggests using familiar logic program notation to place facts
   and queries on HTML pages. The embedded rules also have the ability to
   refer to other HTML pages with other predicates using a namespace
--
  References

    1. Das, S.K. (1992). Deductive Databases and Logic Programming.
       Addison Wesley.
    2. Brickley, D., Guha, R.V., Layman, A. (1999). Resource Description
--
       Model and Syntax. W3C Proposed Recommendation.
       http://www.w3.org/TR/
    5. Loke, S.W., Davison, A. (1996). Logic Programming with the World
       Wide Web. Proc. of the 7th ACM Conf. on Hypertext.
       http://www.cs.unc.edu/~barman/HT96/P14/lpwww.html
    6. Niemelä, I., Simons, P. (1997). Smodels -- an implementation of the
       stable model and well-founded semantics for normal logic programs
       Proc. of the 4th Int. Conf. on Logic Programming and Non-Monotonic
       Reasoning. Dagstuhl, Germany.
       http://saturn.hut.fi/pub/papers/lpnmr97-sd.ps.gz
    7. Ramakrishnan, R., Srivastava, D., Sudarshan, D. (1992). CORAL:
       Control, Relations and Logic. Proc. of the Int. Conf. on VLDB..
    8. Sandewall, E. (1996). Towards a World-Wide Data Base. Proc. of the
       5th Int. WWW Conf..
